Title: An Information-Space Perspective to Scene Graph Sufficiency for Robotic Task Planning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.15587v1

Published Time: Tue, 15 Sep 2026 02:33:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# An Information-Space Perspective to Scene Graph Sufficiency for Robotic Task Planning 

Ba¸ sak Sakçak 1 and Francesco Verdoja 2

Abstract — Planning in complex environments requires task specifications grounded in representations that capture objects, relations, and affordances; scene graphs meet this need, but their size in large environments hinders efficient planning. While task-aware pruning and hierarchical abstractions have been explored, a general, task-centric formalization of what constitutes a sufficient scene graph for planning remains open. This paper provides such a formalization by modeling planning over scene graphs within an information-spaces framework through the definition of scene graph transition systems and relevant action semantics for navigation and manipulation. We then introduce derived scene graphs via information mappings that merge and prune nodes and induce quotient transition systems augmented with motion primitives to capture higher-level actions over merged graph nodes. Sufficiency is characterized by two conditions: (i) the information mapping yields a deterministic quotient, and (ii) the task is well-posed over derived traces, ensuring plans found on the derived model are feasible on the maximal system. We illustrate the framework using a task over an example environment, showing both sufficient and insufficient reduced scene graphs. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Robots typically achieve desired behavior in the physical world by planning sequences of actions in advance. Planning, in turn, requires a model that captures the objects in the physical world, their attributes, and the relations and affordances that constrain possible robot actions. Over this model, the desired behavior can be specified and effects of the robot actions can be evaluated. Planning directly on raw world models ( e.g., dense metric maps or point clouds) becomes quickly intractable, while purely symbolic descriptions lack the contextual detail needed to ensure realizable, context-appropriate plans. Scene graphs have emerged as a compelling middle ground: by modeling environments as hierarchical graphs of spatial entities and their relations, they provide a semantically rich abstraction that grounds planning in the actual state of the world, and can be constructed online from sensor data to autonomously instantiate planning domains [1], [2]. Yet real environments induce large scene graphs, significantly increasing planning complexity [3]. Existing scene-graph planning approaches show that smaller, task-relevant graphs improve planning [2]–[5], but they largely rely on heuristics or Large Language Models (LLMs), offering empirical rather than principled guarantees about preserving plan existence 

> F. Verdoja was supported by the Research Council of Finland (decision 354909) during this work.
> 1Dept. of Advanced Computing Sciences, Maastricht University, the Netherlands (

basak.sakcak@maastrichtuniversity.nl )      

> 2School of Electrical Engineering, Aalto University, Finland (

francesco.verdoja@aalto.fi )

and feasibility. This paper focuses on the complementary formal aspect of determining what information a derived scene graph must preserve so that plans found on it correspond to feasible plans on the maximal scene graph. In parallel with this scene-graph literature, a line of work on information spaces studies what encoding of information given as a robot’s interaction history of action-observation pairs is needed for tasks to remain solvable [6], [7]. However, a gap exists between this formalism and its application to concrete problems. Borrowing ideas from [6], we address the problem of “simplifying” a scene graph representation and propose a formal structure over which questions about the sufficiency of a simplified scene graph in terms of determining a plan feasible for the original representation can be understood in a precise way. The main contribution of this paper is a framework for reasoning about sufficiency of scene graphs for robotic task planning. First we extend the framework in [6] and introduce conditions under which an internal representation is sufficient for planning purposes, and when motion primitives are used. Then, we connect these conditions to planning over scene graphs. We define scene graph transition systems, involving navigation and manipulation actions. Then, we formalize derived scene graphs as quotient models induced by many-to-one information mappings, with motion primitives accounting for high-level actions. We then provide conditions under which plans found over derived systems remain feasible for the maximal system. II. R ELATED LITERATURE 

Mapping semantic information enables complex planning in many robotics domains, from autonomous driving to mobile manipulation. Beyond augmenting traditional 2D/3D maps, 3D Scene Graphs (3DSGs) have emerged as metric-semantic representations whose nodes denote spatial concepts (rooms, objects) and edges encode relations (inclusion, adjacency) [8], [9]. They provide memory-efficient, perception-driven semantic understanding and have been demonstrated in real-time operation on robots, 

e.g., Hydra [1], [8]. Extensions broaden semantic content with open-vocabulary features (ConceptGraphs [10]) and address long-term mapping [11], [12]. Scene graphs are increasingly being adopted as representations for task and motion planning (TAMP). Two main directions appear: leveraging scene-graph structure and hierarchy to build planning domains or to plan iteratively across levels [2], [13]–[15], and using large language models (LLMs) that consume the scene graph arXiv:2609.15587v1 [cs.RO] 14 Sep 2026 as context [4], [15]. Because planning on full graphs is complex, most of these methods decompose them through either: high-to-low abstraction planning that focuses on nodes relevant to the current plan [13], [15]; heuristics that compress dense subgraphs ( e.g., aggregating equivalent nodes) [2], [3]; and iterative subgraph expansion, sometimes guided by LLMs [4]. Some existing methods ( e.g., [3]), provide guarantees in specific symbolic planning settings, while many heuristic, learned, and LLM-guided reductions are evaluated empirically. Complementary to these methods, we provide a formal framework for determining when a derived scene graph induced by pruning (but also merging) preserves information needed for planning. More broadly, solving robotic planning problems requires choosing a model of the robot–environment dynamics, which also determines plan existence and feasibility in the original system. A key line of work asks what information from action–observation histories must be retained for tasks to be solvable: histories are mapped to information states 

(equivalence classes), yielding minimally sufficient quotients that can simulate history-based policies [6], [7], [16], [17]. These ideas align with formal methods, where abstractions preserve properties via simulation and refinement [18]. In TAMP literature, PDDL [19] abstracts geometric and differential constraints into predicates and discrete actions that must be grounded by motion planning; because even few objects and predicates induce large state spaces, structure-preserving simplifications are pursued [20], [21]. Together, these works show that scene graphs are useful planning representations but abstraction is necessary for scalability. However, existing scene-graph planning approaches typically evaluate abstractions empirically. In contrast, information-space and formal-abstraction methods investigate whether a representation preserves the necessary task-related information for planning or plan execution. Here, we bridge these directions by casting scene-graph reduction as an information mapping and by giving conditions under which a derived scene graph is sufficient for planning. III. S UFFICIENT MODELS FOR PLANNING 

A. Notation 

For a given set A, we write A≤N to denote the set of all finite length sequences of the elements of A. Given a function 

f : A → B, f (A) denotes its image and the preimage of 

b ∈ B under f is denoted by f −1(b). Given a non-injective function g : A → B, [a]g := {a′ ∈ A | g(a) = g(a′)}

denotes an equivalence class induced by g. Finally, we will write A/g := {[a]g | a ∈ A} to denote the set of all equivalence classes induced by g. Given two functions 

g1 : A → B1 and g2 : A → B2, g1 is a refinement of g2 if the partitioning over A induced by g1 refines that of g2.A transition system is a triple S = ( S, Λ, T ), in which S

is the set of states, Λ is the set of names for the outgoing transitions, and T ⊂ S×Λ×S is a ternary relation describing the transitions. If for each (s, λ ) ∈ S × Λ there is a unique 

s′ ∈ S such that (s, λ, s ′) ∈ T , then we will write this system as (S, Λ, τ ) in which τ : S × Λ → S is a function. Given a transition system S = ( S, Λ, τ ) a (finite) trace of S is a sequence of pairs (s1, λ 1, . . . , s N −1, λ N −1, s N ) for some N ,satisfying that si ∈ S and λi ∈ Λ for all i = 1 , . . . , N , and respect τ such that for all i = 1 , . . . , N −1, si+1 = τ (si, λ i).Given a labeling function σ : S → L, in which L is a set of labels, the quotient of S by σ is the transition system 

(S/σ, Λ, T /σ ), denoted by S/σ , in which S/σ = {[s]σ |

s ∈ S} and T /σ = {([ s]σ , λ, [s′]σ ) | (s, λ, s ′) ∈ T }.

B. Planner Perspective 

A robot embedded in and interacting with an environment is modeled as two coupled transition systems, named internal 

and external systems in [6]. The external system corresponds to the physical environment, including the robot body, and the internal system represents the perspective of a decision maker. Let X = ( X, U, f ) be a transition system representing the external system, in which, X and U are the external state and action spaces, f : X × U → X is a state transition function such that f (x, u ) is the state reached after taking action u at state x. In this work, we extend the framework presented in [6] by introducing the planner perspective for the internal system. Given a task description, we consider a planner that systematically explores the space of all finite sequences of actions over a given model and determines one that satisfies the given task. Tasks are modeled over the finite external system traces. 

Definition 1 (Task): Given X , let ΩX denote the set of all traces of X . A task T for an external system X is the subset T ⊆ ΩX .Given a task, a plan is determined so that the robot exhibits the desired behavior, in which case it is called a feasible plan for task T . In this work, we focus on plans that are represented as a sequence of actions, as this is typical for many planning problems, including many for which scene graphs have been proposed, e.g., [2], [4]. 

Definition 2 (Feasible plan for T ): Given an external system X = ( X, U, f ) initialized at x1 ∈ X, let ω˜u(x1) =(x1, u 1, x 2, . . . , u N −1, x N ) ∈ ΩX be a trace corresponding to a plan ˜u(x1) = ( u1, u 2, . . . , u N −1) of some length N −1.A plan ˜u(x1) is called a feasible plan for T if ω˜u(x1) ∈ T .Given a task T for an external system X , the objective of a planner is to determine a feasible plan for T . However, typically, the planner is given a model of the external system over which also the task T is transcribed. Let M =(XM , U, f M ) be a model of the external system , in which 

XM is the set of states, U is the set of actions, and fM is a state transition function. Given M, an initial state x1 ∈ XM ,and a task TM ⊆ ΩM, a planner systematically explores 

XM and the space of action sequences consistent with M.A solution is found if a particular sequence of actions results in a trace that belongs in TM . Two questions arise: (i) can the task T be expressed over the traces of M? (ii) is a plan feasible for TM also feasible for T ? These questions are addressed in the following subsection. C. Sufficient Models for Planning 

To determine conditions under which feasible plans determined by a planner using a particular model are feasible for the external system as well, we focus on models that are quotient systems derived from an external system X =(X, U, f ) through a labeling function κ : X → XM named an information mapping (I-map) . Given κ, the quotient of 

X by κ is the transition system M := ( X/κ, U, f /κ ). At the highest level, a model of the external system is the external system itself, that is, κ is a bijection and M = X .However, in most cases this model is prohibitive for search, and we are interested in determining a “simpler” one as a quotient system obtained by a many-to-one mapping κ. A crucial requirement on this quotient system is that it should still allow determining a feasible plan for task T . Note that the quotient system may not be deterministic as this depends on the selected labeling function κ. Suppose for all 

x, s, x ′, s ′ ∈ X and all u ∈ U , the following holds: 

κ(x) = κ(s) ∧ x′ = f (x, u ) ∧ s′ = f (s, u ) = ⇒

κ(x′) = κ(s′). (1) Then, the resulting quotient system (X/κ, U, f /κ ) is deterministic as well [6]. A labeling function κ is called 

sufficient if it satisfies the implication given in (1). Thus, if 

κ is sufficient, the labels can be uniquely determined when limited to the quotient system. When using a derived system for planning, it is natural to ask whether the task can still be expressed over the traces of this new system. Given X = ( X, U, f ) and a derived system M = ( XM , U, f M ) := X /κ , let ΩX and ΩM be the corresponding sets of traces. Furthermore, let cκ : Ω X →

ΩM be a mapping, named I-map condenser , under which 

(x1, u 1, . . . , x N ) 7 → (κ(x1), u 1, . . . , κ (xN )) . (2) A task T is called well-posed under cκ if cκ−1(cκ(T )) = 

T [22]. Informally, well-posedness means that a task expressed over ΩX can similarly be expressed over ΩM

without losing any task-related information. Thus, because task accomplishment information can be determined solely by the derived system traces without ambiguities, we can say that the derived system is rich enough for planning purposes. 

Proposition 1: Let X = ( X, U, f ) be an external system and M = ( XM , U, f M ) := X /κ be a model. Let T ⊆ ΩX

be a task. Suppose κ is sufficient and T is well-posed under 

cκ. Let TM = cκ(T ) be the task posed over M such that 

TM ⊆ ΩM. Then, any feasible plan for TM is also a feasible plan for T .

Proof: Let ˜u(s1) = ( u1, . . . , u N ) be a feasible plan for 

TM from s1 = κ(x1) and let ωX be the corresponding trace of X generated by the same sequence from x1. Since κ is sufficient, the condensed trace cκ(ωX ) is the unique trace 

ωM generated in M from κ(x1). Because ˜u(s1) is feasible for TM = cκ(T ), ωM ∈ cκ(T ). Because T is well-posed under cκ, ωX ∈ c−1 

> κ

(cκ(T )) = T . Therefore, the sequence of actions ˜u(s1) is feasible for T from x1 ∈ X.Let ctask : Ω X → { 0, 1} such that ctask (ω) = 1 if ω ∈ T

and 0 otherwise. 

Lemma 1: Task T is well-posed under cκ if and only if 

cκ is a refinement of ctask .Proof: ( =⇒ direction) Suppose T is well-posed under cκ. For contradiction, suppose cκ does not refine ctask .Then there exist ω, ω ′ ∈ ΩX such that cκ(ω) = cκ(ω′),but ctask (ω)̸ = ctask (ω′). Let ω ∈ T and ω′̸ ∈ T . Since 

cκ(ω) = cκ(ω′) and ω ∈ T we have ω′ ∈ cκ−1(cκ(T )) 

which contradicts with well-posedness. ( ⇐= direction) For contradiction suppose cκ−1(cκ(T )) ̸ = T . Then there exist 

ω ∈ T and ω′̸ ∈ T with cκ(ω) = cκ(ω′). Refinement then implies that ω, ω ′ ∈ ctask −1(1) , contradicting ω′̸ ∈ T .The following definition combines two requirements for a useful model. Sufficiency of κ guarantees deterministic behavior of the model transitions and sufficiency of cκ,while well-posedness guarantees that task satisfaction is determined completely by the model trace. 

Definition 3 (Sufficient model for planning): Given an external system X , a model M = X /κ is called sufficient for planning for task T if (i) κ is sufficient, and (ii) the task 

T is well-posed under cκ.

D. Motion Primitives 

The quotient structure introduced in the previous section assumes that the original and the derived system share the same set of actions. However, often a set of higher-level actions (motion primitives) that correspond to a sequence from set U is used, typically parametrized by the system states. For example, an action such as move to a region may require executing a sequence of lower-level actions whose intermediate external states are not represented in the model. The next definition formalizes this notion. 

Definition 4 (Motion primitive): Let X = ( X, U, f ) be an external system. A motion primitive σ is a mapping σ :

X → U <N assigning to every state x ∈ X a finite action sequence σ(x) = ( u1, . . . , u N ). Starting from some x1 = x,the execution of σ(x) induces the finite trace 

¯f (x, σ ) := ( x1, u 1, x 2, . . . , u N , x N +1 ) ,

in which xi+1 = f (xi, u i). The corresponding endpoint transition is ⋄f (x, σ ) := xN +1 .

We can consider a set of motion primitives to be the new set of actions for the external system. Let Σ denote the set of motion primitives. Using Σ as the set of actions, the system restricted by the motion primitives is given by 

XΣ = ( X, Σ, ⋄f ) and we use ΩXΣ to denote its traces. Given a sequence of actions ˜σ ∈ (Σ) N for some N , the respective trace of XΣ is given by 

ω˜σ = ( x1, σ 1, x 2, σ 2, . . . , σ N , x N +1 ) ∈ ΩXΣ ,

in which xi+1 = ⋄f (xi, σ i), i = 1 , . . . , N . Each motion primitive σi induces a finite trace ¯f (xi, σ i) of X . Hence, the corresponding trace in X is obtained by concatenating the subtraces induced by the individual motion primitives, 

¯ω˜σ = ¯f (x1, σ 1)⌢ ¯f (x2, σ 2)⌢ . . . ⌢ ¯f (xN , σ N ),

in which ⌢ denotes the concatenation of traces with the common boundary states appearing only once. Let 

¯ΩXΣ := {¯ω˜σ ∈ ΩX | ˜σ ∈ (Σ) N , N < ∞} ⊆ ΩX

denote the set of external system traces generated by finite sequences of motion primitives. Since each ¯ω˜σ is defined through its generating primitive sequence ˜σ, its decomposition into motion primitive induced subtraces is fixed by construction. We then define the motion-primitive condenser cMP : ¯ΩXΣ → ΩXΣ by cMP (¯ ω˜σ ) = ω˜σ . Since restricting the action set to motion primitives may exclude some traces of ΩX , we define the task considered by this restricted system as TΣ := T ∩ ¯ΩXΣ .For a set X0 ⊆ X of admissible initial states, we say that Σ is complete for T if ∀x1 ∈ X0, Tx1̸ = ∅ =⇒

(TΣ)x1̸ = ∅, in which the subscript x1 denotes the respective traces beginning at x1. If Σ is complete for T , then existence of feasible plan from x1 over X implies that there exists a feasible plan from x1 over XΣ.IV. S CENE GRAPH TRANSITION SYSTEMS 

In this section, we introduce the notion of scene graph transition system as an application of the theory presented in Sec. III. When defining the scene graph, we follow the conventions used in previous work [1], [23]. We will also introduce a sample set of actions relevant to simple navigation and manipulation, similar to [2]. 

A. Scene graph representation 

A scene graph G = ( V, E ) maps spatio-semantic relations among scene elements via edges E over nodes V . Nodes represent spatial elements ( e.g., tables, robots, bedrooms) with spatial features (pose/configuration, bounding box) and semantic features (class, affordances, color). Following [1], we use five node categories: building , rooms , places , objects ,and agents . A place is a region within a room obtained by space decomposition, e.g., GVD [24] or 2D polygons from meshes [2], such that each object/agent lies entirely in one place and all navigable positions within a place are path-connected. We denote building, room, place, and object, and agent node sets as Vb, Vr , Vp, Vo, and Va, respectively. In this work, we take Va := {va}, in which va is the node representing the robot. Many scene graphs include a 3D mesh [1] or point cloud [23] as the global spatial frame; we omit this here since it mainly supports localization and motion planning rather than abstract reasoning or task planning. We consider three types of edges, encoding inclusion ,

adjacency , and carrier relations, though additional relations (e.g., functional [25] or event [5]) are possible. 

Definition 5 (General Inclusion Relation): A general inclusion relation is an asymmetric and transitive binary relation denoted by Rginc ⊆ V × V . We say vj is included in vi if (vi, v j ) ∈ R ginc . Let vs be the root node which is the largest spatial category such that all nodes in V \ { vs}

are included in vs. Then, Rginc satisfies that for any 

vj ∈ V \ { vs} exists a vi ∈ V such that (vi, v j ) ∈ R ginc .

Definition 6 (Reduced Inclusion Relation): A reduced inclusion relation, alternatively, an inclusion relation , is a binary relation Rinc ⊆ R ginc obtained by removing from 

Rginc the pairs (vi, v j ) satisfying that there exists a vk such that (vi, v k) ∈ R ginc and (vk, v j ) ∈ R ginc .When considering spatial elements at progressively finer resolutions (e.g., from buildings to objects), inclusion relations are used to introduce a spatial hierarchy ( e.g., the robot being in a specific place). We assume each spatial element vj to only have one parent, i.e., ∀vj ∈ V \{ vs}, {vi |

(vi, v j ) ∈ Rinc } is a singleton. Under this assumption, inclusion relations (Definition 6) form a hierarchical tree 

Tinc = ( V, Rinc ). For concreteness, in this paper, we use a tree with depth three, with nodes at each depth representing respectively the building ( V0 = Vb, consisting of the root node vs alone), rooms ( V1 = Vr ), places ( V2 = Vp), and objects and agents ( V3 = Vo ∪ Va). Let F(vp) denote the free configuration space associated with a place node vp ∈ Vp. We assume that each F(vp) is path connected. 

Definition 7 (Adjacency Relation): An adjacency relation is a symmetric irreflexive relation Radj ⊆ Vp × Vp.Two place nodes vi, v j ∈ Vp are adjacent, written 

(vi, v j ) ∈ Radj , if there exists a path contained in 

F(vi) ∪ F (vj ), or in its closure, connecting a point in F(vi)

to a point in F(vj ).

Definition 8 (Carrier Relation): A carrier relation is an irreflexive and acyclic relation over Va and Vo, i.e., Rcar ⊆

(Vo ∪Va)×Vo. We say that vi is carrying vj if (vi, v j ) ∈ R car .The relation represents a kinematic link, in such a way that if vi moves, then vj moves with it. 

Definition 9 (Scene Graph): A scene graph is an edge-labeled directed graph G = (V, E ) in which 

E = Rinc ∪ R adj ∪ R car together with an edge labeling function ℓe : E → L that attributes each edge a label from the set L = {inc , adj , car } consistent with the relation that generated the edge. This definition makes explicit the scene graph structure that prior works use implicitly ( e.g., [1], [2], [4], [23], [26]); to our knowledge, this is the first formal statement of it. In the following, we will use E(G) and V (G) to denote the edges and nodes of G, respectively. We will use (vi, v j )ℓ to denote the label ℓ ∈ L of the edge connecting (vi, v j ).

Example 1 (Scene graph): Consider the environment e

(Fig. 1a) consisting of three rooms ( r1, r2, r3), with both r1

and r3 only adjacent to r2 (i.e., an open door exists between these rooms). Room r1 is subdivided into two places ( p1,

p2), room r2 in three places ( p3, p4, p5), while room r3 is composed of only one place ( p6). Places are adjacent to each other according to Fig. 1a. Currently, p1 contains a mug m

onto a table t, while p6 contains a desk d and the robotic r1 

> r2
> r3
> tmdap1
> p2
> p3
> p4
> p5
> p6

(a) Environment e    

> er1
> p1
> mtp2
> r2
> p3p4p5
> r3
> p6
> ad

(b) Scene graph G1

Fig. 1: The environment from Example 1 (a), and its scene graph G1 (b). Solid lines are used for inclusion relations, dashed lines for adjacency, and double lines for carrier. agent a. The scene graph G1 for this environment is shown in Fig. 1b. The spatial and semantic features of elements in Vo(G1) (e.g., pose, bounding box, semantic class) are omitted from this example for brevity. 

B. Scene graph transition system 

Using scene graphs as its states, a robot-environment system is modeled as a deterministic transition system. 

Definition 10 (Scene Graph Transition System): Let 

G be the set of all possible scene graphs for a given robot-environment system satisfying that for any G, G ′ ∈ G ,

V (G) = V (G′). A scene graph transition system is the tuple X = (G, U (G), f ), in which U (G) is the set of actions consistent with the scene graph representation and 

f : G × U (G) → G is the state transition function. To formally define the scene graph transition function, we first introduce a set of actions. Note that different sets of actions are possible depending on the scene graph representation and robot embodiment. However, we assume that all action sets are parametrized by the graph nodes and encode possible ways a robot can interact with its environment. Interactions could be for example, navigation, manipulation, and inspection. In the following, we introduce the set of actions that we will refer to in the examples used throughout the paper. 

Definition 11 (Action set of G): Let G be the set of all scene graphs, let Umove (G), Upick (G), and Uplaceon (G) be the sets of actions parametrized by the graph nodes such that 

Umove (G) := {moveto (vpi ) | vpi ∈ Vp(G)},Upick (G) := {pick (voi ) | voi ∈ Vo(G)},Uplaceon (G) := {placeon (voi , v oj ) | voi , v oj ∈ Vo(G)},

in which Vp(G) and Vo(G) are the sets of all place nodes and object nodes, respectively. Then, the set of actions for a space of scene graphs G is U (G) := Umove (G) ∪ Upick (G) ∪

Uplaceon (G).

The set of actions given in Definition 11 are interpreted over the scene graphs in the following ways. 

1) Move action: Let G be a scene graph and let G′ := 

f (G, moveto (v′

> p

)) . Let vp correspond to the place the robot is in, that is, (vp, v a)inc ∈ E(G), in which va is the node representing the robot. If (vp, v p′ )adj ∈ E(G), applying the action moveto (vp′ ) removes the inclusion edge (vp, v a)inc 

and adds (vp′ , v a)inc . Similarly, for any vo satisfying that 

(va, v o)car ∈ E(G), the inclusion edge (vp, v o)inc is removed and (vp′ , v o)inc is added. Moving an object from one place to another might change whether two places are path connected. The adjacency relations, consequently the scene graph edges, are updated accordingly with the move of an object. If 

(vp, v p′ )adj ̸ ∈ E(G), (G, moveto (vp′ )) 7 → G under f .

2) Pick action: A pick action takes an object node as a parameter. Applying pick (vo) action, in which vo is an object node in place vp, adds the carrier edge (va, v o)car to 

E(G) if (vp, v o)inc , (vp, v a)inc ∈ E(G), that is the object 

o is picked up by the robot if they are in the same place, and if the cardinality of the carrier relations the robot is in does not exceed a predefined number. Furthermore, any previous carrier edge that involves vo is removed. Otherwise, 

(G, pick (vo)) 7 → G under f .

3) Placeon action: A placeon (·) action is parametrized by a pair of object nodes (oi, o j ). Assume G contains a carrier edge (va, v oi )car , and inclusion edges 

(vp, v a)inc , (vp, v oi )inc , (vp, v oj )inc ∈ E(G) for some place node vp, i.e., the agent and both oi and oj are in the same place. Then, applying placeon (voi , v oj ) removes the carrier edge (va, v oi )car from G and adds the carrier edge 

(voj , v oi )car . Otherwise, after applying this action the state remains the same. 

Example 2 (Bringing a mug to the desk): Considering the starting scene graph G1 from Example 1 (shown in Fig. 1), let us describe the transitions corresponding to a sequence of actions moving the robotic agent a to room r1,picking up the mug m, and placing it on the desk d in r3.(a) Starting in p6, the robot a first executes a sequence of 

moveto actions to reach p1. Given that each moveto 

action changes only the inclusion relations between a

and nodes in Vp, the combined graph transition is 

f (f (f (f (G1, moveto (p5)) , moveto (p3)) ,

moveto (p2)) , moveto (p1)) = G2

with E(G2) = ( E(G1) \ (p6, a )inc ) ∪ (p1, a )inc .(b) The robot then executes a pick (m) action. The transition is f (G2, pick (m)) = G3 with E(G3) =(E(G2) \ (t, m )car ) ∪ (a, m )car .(c) The robot then executes a sequence of moveto actions to go back to p6. The transition 

f (f (f (f (G3, moveto (p2)) , moveto (p3)) ,

moveto (p5)) , moveto (p6)) = G4

with E(G4) = (E(G3) \ { (p1, a )inc , (p1, m )inc }) ∪{(p6, a )inc , (p6, m )inc }.(d) Finally, the robot executes a placeon (m, d ) action. The graph transition f (G4, placeon (m, d )) = G5 with 

E(G5) = ( E(G4) \ (a, m )car ) ∪ (d, m )car .V. S UFFICIENT SCENE GRAPHS FOR PLANNING 

When a scene graph transition system is obtained through some perception pipeline ( e.g., [1]), we consider this to be a maximal model of the external system (physical world). In this section, based on the framework introduced in Sec. III, we present a new perspective to analyze what is necessary from a scene graph given a planning task. To this end, we introduce the notions derived scene graph and derived scene graph transition system and discuss the conditions under which such a system is sufficient for planning. 

A. Derived Scene Graphs 

Let G be the set of all possible maximal scene graphs for a given robot-environment system. We will refer to G

as the maximal scene graph space . A derived scene graph space Gder is then the codomain of some many-to one I-map 

κ : G → G der . We want Gder , the codomain of κ, to also be a set of scene graphs, i.e., its elements satisfy Definition 9. The I-map κ is defined through merge and prune operations over the elements of G. Specifically, we consider merging nodes in Vp and Vr (nodes corresponding to places and rooms) and pruning nodes in Vo (nodes corresponding to objects). To merge nodes of G, we define two equivalence relations respectively between the nodes in Vp and in Vr

denoted by Rp ⊆ Vp × Vp and Rr ⊆ Vr × Vr . Nodes that are not merged with any other node form singleton equivalence classes. Denote with V o ⊆ Vo the set of object nodes to be pruned. Building nodes, robot node, and non-pruned object nodes are also treated as singleton equivalence classes. Let R

denote the resulting equivalence relation over V (G). Then, the derived graph G′ = κ(G) has node set V (G′) = {[v]R |

v ∈ V (G) \ V o}. We identify each node in G′ with its equivalence class. Its edge set is obtained by mapping the endpoints of all edges not incident to pruned object nodes: 

E(G′) = {([ u]R, [v]R) | (u, v ) ∈ E(G) ∧ u, v ̸ ∈ V o}.

Edge labels are inherited from the original relation that generated them and self-loops created by merging adjacent nodes are discarded. To ensure that the image of κ is a scene graph according to Definition 9 we require that 

(vri , v pj )inc , (vrk , v pl )inc ∈ E(G) ∧ (vpj , v pl ) ∈ R p

=⇒ (vri , v rk ) ∈ R r . (3) This condition ensures that each node has a unique parent connected with an inclusion edge. Second, for every equivalence class of place nodes induced by Rp, the subgraph induced by that class under Radj is connected. This ensures that each derived place node corresponds to a connected region of free configuration space. 

Example 3 (Preimage of derived scene graph): Given the environment e from Example 1, we define Ge as the set of all possible maximal scene graphs of e. Let 

κe : Ge → G der ,e be a mapping from Ge to a derived space 

Gder ,e such that κe: merges all rooms into r123 ; merges places p1 and p2 in p12 ; merges places p3, p4, p5, and p6

into p3456 ; and prunes the desk node d, if present. Let the         

> er123
> p12
> mtp3456
> a
> (a) G′
> 1
> er1
> p1p2
> mtr2
> p3p4
> ap5
> r3
> p6
> (b) ˜G1, an element of κ−1
> e(G′
> 1)

Fig. 2: The derived graph G′ 

> 1

from Example 3 (a), followed by ˜G1 (b). Solid lines are used for inclusion relations, dashed lines for adjacency, and double lines for carrier. scene graph G′ 

> 1

∈ G der ,e , shown in Fig. 2a, be a derived scene graph under κe. When considering the preimage of 

G′

> 1

, i.e., κ−1 

> e

(G′

> 1

) ⊆ G e, we can determine, for example, that both G1 from Fig. 1b and ˜G1 from Fig. 2b are elements of κ−1 

> e

(G′

> 1

) since κe(G1) = κe( ˜G1) = G′

> 1

. On the other hand, none of the graphs from Example 2 is in κ−1 

> e

(G′

> 1

),due to a being in p1 in G2, G3, or m in p6 in G4, G5.The action set U (Gder ) is the set of actions according to Definition 11, meaning that they are parametrized by the nodes of V (Gder ). Because κ modifies the nodes of the scene graphs in G, U (Gder )̸ = U (G). To illustrate this issue, suppose under κ, an object node vo was pruned. Then, pick (vo), placeon (vo, ·), placeon (·, v o) /∈ U (Gder ).Similarly, moveto (vp) /∈ U (Gder ) if vp /∈ V (Gder ) due to merging. Every derived action is interpreted as a motion primitive (Sec. III-D) over the maximal system. Whereas a motion primitive moveto (·) may correspond to a sequence in U (G) of length greater than one, retained pick (·) and 

placeon (·) actions correspond to sequences of length one. For a maximal scene graph G1, let pi denote the place node containing the robot in Gi, i.e., , (pi, v a)inc ∈ E(Gi).Consider a motion primitive moveto (ω), in which ω ∈

Vp/Rp and Vp is the set of place nodes in the maximal scene graph. Its induced trace (G1, u 1, . . . , u N −1, G N ) in the maximal system satisfies that every ui is a move action over G and that pN ∈ ω. Furthermore, there exists an index 

m ∈ { 0, . . . , N } such that pi ∈ [p1]Rp for all i < m and 

pi ∈ ω for all i ≥ m. Therefore, the robot remains inside the initial equivalence class until it enters the target class, and once it enters the target class it does not leave it. 

Definition 12 (Derived scene graph transition system): 

Given a scene graph transition system (G, U (G), f ), and a mapping κ : G → G der , let U (Gder ) be the set of actions over Gder according to Definition 11. Then, a scene graph transition system derived from (G, U (G), f ) by κ is the quotient system (Gder , U (Gder ), Fder ) := ( G, U (Gder ), ⋄f )/κ .Note that (Gder , U (Gder ), Fder ) is deterministic if κ is sufficient with respect to ⋄f , i.e., it satisfies (1). 

B. Scene graphs sufficient for planning 

In Sec. III, we formally defined a model sufficient for planning for a task. Here, we apply this notion to the case er123   

> p123456
> mta

(a) κ1(G1)   

> er123
> p123456
> mtad

(b) κ2(G1)   

> er123
> p1
> mtp2345 p6
> ad

(c) κ3(G1)    

> er123
> p1
> mtp235 p4p6
> ad

(d) κ4(G1)

Fig. 3: The sequence of derived scene graphs presented in Example 4. Solid lines are used for inclusion relations, dashed lines for adjacency, and double lines for carrier. when models are derived scene graph transition systems. Let X = (G, U (G), f ) be the maximal scene graph transition system and T ⊆ ΩX be a task over its traces. Given an I-map κ : G → G der , let XU (Gder ) := ( G, U (Gder ), ⋄f ) be the restriction of X by the set U (Gder ) of motion primitives. Consecutively, let Xder be the derived scene graph transition system, that is, Xder := XU (Gder )/κ .Following Sec. III-D, the motion-primitive condenser is cMP : ¯ΩXU (Gder ) → ΩXU (Gder ). The I-map κ induces the condenser cκ : ΩXU (Gder ) → ΩXder from the traces corresponding to motion-primitives to derived scene graph traces as given in (2). Then, the complete condenser is 

c = cκ ◦ cMP .

Proposition 2: Given a maximal scene graph transition system X = ( G, U (G), f ), let XU (Gder ) = ( G, U (Gder ), ⋄f ) be its restriction by motion primitives and let Xder = XU (Gder )/κ 

be the derived scene graph transition system by κ. Let 

T ⊆ ΩX be a task and define TU (Gder ) := T ∩ ¯ΩXU (Gder ).Suppose κ is sufficient with respect to ⋄f and TU (Gder ) is well-posed under c = cκ ◦ cMP . Then, every feasible plan in 

Xder , initialized at κ(G1) for c(TU (Gder )) is feasible in X for 

T when executed from G1 ∈ G .

Proof: By construction, every trace of XU (Gder )

corresponds to a trace of X under cMP . Hence, well-posedness of TU (Gder ) under c implies that cMP (TU (Gder ))

is well-posed under cκ. Then we can apply Proposition 1 to XU (Gder ) with task cMP (TU (Gder )). Every feasible plan in 

Xder induces a trace in XU (Gder ) belonging to cMP (TU (Gder ))

whose corresponding trace in X belongs to TU (Gder ) by well-posedness under c. Since TU (Gder ) ⊆ T , the plan corresponding to the sequence of actions in U (G) encoded by the motion primitive sequence is feasible for T .

Corollary 1: Let the assumptions of Proposition 2 hold. If the set U (Gder ) is complete for T from the admissible initial states G0 ∈ G , then for any G1 ∈ G 0, existence of a feasible plan for T in X from G1 implies existence of a feasible plan for c(TU (Gder )) in Xder from κ(G1).Proof: If a feasible trace for T exists from G1,completeness of motion primitives implies that there exists a motion primitive generated trace from G1 belonging to 

TU (Gder ). Then, c maps this trace to a trace in Xder belonging to c(TU (Gder )), proving that a feasible plan exists in Xder .The following example illustrates the notions of sufficient scene graphs and when the required conditions are violated. 

Example 4 (Sufficient scene graph for a task): 

Consider again the environment e from Example 1, represented by X = ( Ge, U (Ge), f ). Let the task Te ⊆ ΩX

be described informally as “Bringing a mug to the desk while avoiding p4”. Te is the set of all finite scene graph traces where the robot a is never in p4, and which end with a graph where the mug m is onto desk d; formally: 

Te = {(G1, u 1, G 2, . . . , G N ) ∈ ΩX | (d, m )car ∈ E(GN )

∧(̸ ∃G ∈ (G1, . . . , G N ) ( p4, a )inc ∈ E(G)) }<N 

> N=0

Suppose G1 from Example 1 is the unique initial state for 

X . We now consider the derived scene graphs in Fig. 3 and discuss which information must be preserved for the task. Let κ1 be the I-map whose derived graph κ1(G1) is shown in Fig. 3a. Since the node d is pruned, the derived graph cannot distinguish traces that end with (d, m )car ∈ E(GN )

from traces that do not. Therefore, the task is not well-posed under c1 = cκ1 ◦ cMP .Let κ2 be the I-map whose derived graph κ2(G1) is shown in Fig. 3b. This I-map preserves the node d distinguishing the traces that satisfy the goal condition from the ones that do not. However, since all places are merged into a single node in the derived graph, the outcomes of pick (m) and 

placeon (m, d ) actions cannot be determined in the derived system. Hence κ2 is not sufficient. Let κ3 be the I-map whose derived graph κ3(G1) is shown in Fig. 3c. This mapping distinguishes p1, and p6. Therefore, the relevant pick (m) and placeon (m, d ) outcomes are uniquely determined. However, the places are merged into a single derived place node p2345 . Consequently, a derived trace using moveto (p2345 ) cannot determine whether the corresponding traces in the maximal system pass through 

p4. The task is not well-posed under c3 = cκ3 ◦ cMP .Let κ4 be the I-map whose derived graph κ4(G1) is shown in Fig. 3d. This mapping distinguishes p1, p4, and p6, while merging the rest of the place nodes. The derived graph retains the information needed to determine the outcomes of pick (m) and placeon (m, d ), and it also preserves the information needed to check whether the robot visits 

p4. Thus, on the reachable part of the transition system considered in this example, κ4 satisfies the sufficiency and well-posedness conditions for Te. The derived plan 

π4 = ( moveto (p235 ), moveto (p1), pick (m),

moveto (p235 ), moveto (p6), placeon (m, d )) 

corresponds to a feasible plan for Te in the maximal scene graph transition system. VI. D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

We introduced a formal notion of sufficient scene graphs for robotic task planning. The proposed formalism reframes scene graph compression as a task-dependent information-abstraction problem. Rather than asking whether a derived scene graph preserves all properties of the maximal graph, the relevant question is whether it preserves the information needed to find plans that remain feasible in the original system. In this view, scene graphs are states of a transition system over which pruning and merging operations define an I-map, and derived scene graphs are quotient models induced by that mapping. The resulting conditions separate distinct sources that allow checking feasibility of plans obtained over derived scene graphs. Deterministic quotient behavior ensures that derived actions have well-defined effects, while well-posedness ensures that task satisfaction is determined by derived traces. Together, these conditions guarantee that plans obtained over derived systems lift to feasible plans over the maximal system. Preservation of plan existence additionally requires completeness of the motion primitives induced by the derived action set. This perspective is complementary to existing scene graph planning methods. Hierarchical, heuristic, and LLM-guided compression methods can be seen as implicitly choosing an I-map, and the framework presented here provides criteria for analyzing such choices. The characterization of planning sufficiency also suggests computational directions. Given a candidate merge and prune operations, sufficiency can be checked by searching counterexamples (similar to [27]), that is, searching for traces in the maximal system that map to the same derived trace but have different task labels. Furthermore, it also connects to partition-refinement methods for computing quotient systems since the induced I-map labeling is required to be a refinement of task labeling. The present formulation is limited to deterministic scene graph transition systems, open-loop plans, and a restricted set of relations. Extending the framework to uncertainty, richer semantic relations, and developing algorithms for constructing (near) minimal sufficient derived scene graphs or their approximations remain important directions for future work. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

OpenAI’s GPT5.5 was used to improve text readability. REFERENCES [1] N. Hughes, Y. Chang, and L. Carlone, “Hydra: A real-time spatial perception system for 3d scene graph construction and optimization,” in Robotics: Science and Systems , 2022. [2] A. Ray, C. Bradley, L. Carlone, and N. Roy, “Task and motion planning in hierarchical 3d scene graphs,” in International Symposium of Robotics Research (ISRR) , 2024. [3] C. Agia, K. M. Jatavallabhula, M. Khodeir, O. Miksik, V. Vineet, M. Mukadam, L. Paull, and F. Shkurti, “Taskography: Evaluating robot task planning over large 3d scene graphs,” in Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2022, pp. 46–58. [4] K. Rana, J. Haviland, S. Garg, J. Abou-Chakra, I. Reid, and N. Suenderhauf, “SayPlan: Grounding Large Language Models using 3D Scene Graphs for Scalable Robot Task Planning,” in 7th Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2023. [5] P. Nguyen, F. Verdoja, and V. Kyrki, “Event-Grounding Graph: Unified Spatio-Temporal Scene Graph from Robotic Observations,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2026. [6] B. Sakcak, K. G. Timperi, V. Weinstein, and S. M. LaValle, “A mathematical characterization of minimally sufficient robot brains,” 

The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 1342–1362, 2024. [7] G. McFassel and D. A. Shell, “Reactivity and statefulness: Action-based sensors, plans, and necessary state,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 385–411, 2023. [8] N. Hughes, Y. Chang, S. Hu, R. Talak, R. Abdulhai, J. Strader, and L. Carlone, “Foundations of spatial perception for robotics: Hierarchical representations and real-time systems,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , 2024. [9] J. Kuhn, F. Verdoja, T. Mihaylova, and V. Kyrki, “Relational Scene Graphs for Object Grounding of Natural Language Commands,” in 

2026 IEEE Int. Conf. on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN) . IEEE, 2026. [10] Q. Gu, A. Kuwajerwala, S. Morin, K. M. Jatavallabhula, B. Sen, A. Agarwal, C. Rivera, W. Paul, K. Ellis, R. Chellappa, C. Gan, C. M. de Melo, J. B. Tenenbaum, A. Torralba, F. Shkurti, and L. Paull, “ConceptGraphs: Open-Vocabulary 3D Scene Graphs for Perception and Planning,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2024. [11] P. Nguyen, F. Verdoja, and V. Kyrki, “REACT: Real-time Efficient Attribute Clustering and Transfer for Updatable 3D Scene Graph,” in 

2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2025. [12] L. Schmid, M. Abate, Y. Chang, and L. Carlone, “Khronos: A Unified Approach for Spatio-Temporal Metric-Semantic SLAM in Dynamic Environments,” in Robotics: Science and Systems XX , 2024. [13] Z. Dai, A. Asgharivaskasi, T. Duong, S. Lin, M.-E. Tzes, G. Pappas, and N. Atanasov, “Optimal scene graph planning with large language model guidance,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2024. [14] S. Ejaz, M. Giberna, M. Shaheer, J. A. Millan-Romera, A. Tourani, P. Kremer, H. Voos, and J. L. Sanchez-Lopez, “Situationally-aware Path Planning Exploiting 3D Scene Graphs,” Aug. 2025. [15] Z. Ni, X. Deng, C. Tai, X. Zhu, Q. Xie, W. Huang, X. Wu, and L. Zeng, “GRID: Scene-graph-based instruction-driven robotic task planning,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2024. [16] J. Subramanian, A. Sinha, R. Seraj, and A. Mahajan, “Approximate information state for approximate planning and reinforcement learning in partially observed systems,” Journal of Machine Learning Research ,vol. 23, no. 12, 2022. [17] B. Sakçak, V. K. Weinstein, K. G. Timperi, and S. M. LaValle, “Minimally sufficient structures for information-feedback policies,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13852 , 2025. [18] H. Kress-Gazit, M. Lahijanian, and V. Raman, “Synthesis for robots: Guarantees and feedback for robot behavior,” Ann. Rev. of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 211–236, 2018. [19] M. Ghallab, A. Howe, C. Knoblock, D. McDermott, A. Ram, M. Veloso, D. Weld, and D. Wilkins, “PDDL—The Planning Domain Definition Language,” Technical Report , 1998. [20] R. Horˇ cík, D. Fišer, and A. Torralba, “Homomorphisms of lifted planning tasks: The case for delete-free relaxation heuristics,” in 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 36, no. 9, 2022, pp. 9767–9775. [21] C. Allen, A. de Mello Koch, H. Kokel, G. Konidaris, and M. Katz, “Simplifying planning tasks with fact-level relevance analysis,” in 

Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling , vol. 36, no. 1, 2026, pp. 2–10. [22] B. Sakçak, D. A. Shell, and J. M. O’Kane, “Limits of specifiability for sensor-based robotic planning tasks,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2025. [23] Y. Tang, M. Wang, Y. Deng, Z. Zheng, J. Zhong, T. Liu, C. Zhao, and Y. Yue, “OpenObject-NAV: Open-Vocabulary Object-Oriented Navigation Based on Dynamic Carrier-Relationship Scene Graph,” in 

2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2025. [24] H. Oleynikova, Z. Taylor, R. Siegwart, and J. Nieto, “Sparse 3D Topological Graphs for Micro-Aerial Vehicle Planning,” in IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2018. [25] D. Rotondi, F. Scaparro, H. Blum, and K. O. Arras, “Fungraph: Functionality aware 3d scene graphs for language-prompted scene interaction,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2025. [26] V. H. Nguyen, P. T. Q. Anh, and X.-T. Truong, “Fast Path Planning with Hierarchical Approach Based on 3D Scene Graphs,” in Interactive Collaborative Robotics . Springer Nature, 2026. [27] J. Seipp and M. Helmert, “Counterexample-guided cartesian abstraction refinement for classical planning,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , vol. 62, pp. 535–577, 2018.