Title: Semi-Decentralized Multi-Spacecraft Collision Avoidance under Communication Constraints

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.26570v1

Published Time: Thu, 30 Jul 2026 00:33:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# (Preprint) AAS 26-860 SEMI-DECENTRALIZED MULTI-SPACECRAFT COLLISION AVOIDANCE UNDER COMMUNICATION CONSTRAINTS 

## Grace R. Kim *, Mahdi Al-Husseini *, Duncan Eddy †

## , and Mykel J. Kochenderfer ‡

Current spacecraft collision-avoidance operations rely on intermittent ground-station con-tacts, requiring operators to plan with delayed and asynchronously updated information. Consequently, maneuvers must be planned with only intermittent information sharing be-tween operators, raising the question of how much coordination is needed to achieve collision-avoidance performance comparable to centralized planning. As satellite populations con-tinue to grow, understanding this tradeoff is becoming increasingly important for scalable collision avoidance operations. Although decision-theoretic approaches such as partially ob-servable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) capture the sequential and uncertain nature of collision avoidance, existing multiagent extensions typically assume either continuous in-formation sharing or communication models that do not reflect operational ground-station constraints. To explicitly model this intermittent information availability, we formulate the spacecraft-to-spacecraft collision avoidance problem as a semi-decentralized partially ob-servable Markov decision process (SDec-POMDP), where we govern information propa-gation directly by realistic ground-station visibility windows. Joint maneuver policies are computed using approximate Recursive Small-Step Semi-Decentralized A* (RS-SDA*), fol-lowing the state-of-the-art A*-based lineage for decentralized multiagent planning. Across a representative suite of conjunction scenarios, semi-decentralized planning recovers near-centralized maneuver quality while requiring 28.5% fewer synchronization events than con-tinuous coordination. Comparisons with representative rule-based operator heuristics further show that communication-aware planning more consistently achieves the desired operational miss-distance band while minimizing unnecessary trajectory deviation. Together, these re-sults establish a practical planning framework for autonomous collision avoidance under realistic intermittent communication, bridging the gap between idealized centralized coordi-nation and fully decentralized planning execution. 

INTRODUCTION 

Low Earth orbit (LEO) has become an increasingly congested and commercially active domain. Over the past decade, the number of active satellites has grown rapidly, 1, 2 driven in part by the expansion of mega-constellations from private industry operators. This growth in the active satellite population is directly in-creasing the frequency of spacecraft conjunctions, raising collision risk and requiring more frequent collision avoidance operations. In 2023, the United States Space Force 18th Space Defense Squadron (18 SDS) tracked over 600,000 Conjunction Data Messages (CDMs) per day, tripling the daily rate observed in 2020, placing significant operational burden on satellite operators. 3 Recent FCC space safety reports further highlight this trend, with Starlink executing more than 355,000 collision-risk mitigation maneuvers between June 2025 and May 2026, while Amazon’s Project Kuiper also reported thousands of avoidance maneuvers with its constel-lation expansion. 4, 5 With multiple active mega-constellations, collision avoidance will increasingly require coordination between multiple independent operators with asynchronous information updates, making scal-able communication and planning strategies essential. Collectively, these trends suggest that conjunction management is evolving from a monitoring task into a large-scale, real-time decision-making problem. 

> *PhD Candidate, Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, 496 Lomita Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
> †Post-Doctoral Researcher, Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, 496 Lomita Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
> ‡Professor, Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, 496 Lomita Mall, Stanford, CA 94305

1arXiv:2607.26570v1 [cs.RO] 29 Jul 2026 Current collision avoidance (CA) operations remain largely ground-driven and operator-specific. Satellite operators receive CDMs from U.S. Space Force or commercial space situational awareness providers, eval-uate conjunction risk, and plan candidate maneuvers subject to their own operational constraints. 6 These decisions are made under uncertainty: state estimates are derived from imperfect observations, covariance estimates are often poorly calibrated, and maneuver outcomes propagate nonlinearly over time. 7 Further-more, this uncertainty is compounded by limited coordination across operators. Decision-making practices for collision-avoidance maneuver planning vary widely among satellite operators, ranging from heuristic thresholds, human-in-the-loop workflows, and proprietary autonomous systems. 1 As a result, conjunction mitigation decisions are often made independently, with limited awareness of other agents’ actions, leading to potentially inconsistent or suboptimal outcomes. Satellite collision avoidance has been studied extensively from operational, analytical, optimization, and decision-theoretic perspectives. Existing operational systems support conjunction screening and risk-based maneuver recommendation, 8 while analytical and optimization approaches generate feasible maneuvers us-ing orbit propagation, relative-motion models, and constrained optimization techniques. 7, 9 More recently, researchers have explored onboard autonomy through machine learning, reinforcement learning, and Markov decision process formulations for maneuver planning under uncertainty. 10–13 These developments reflect a broader trend toward increasingly autonomous and data-driven collision avoidance systems. 14 However, the vast majority of existing methods formulate collision avoidance from the perspective of a single spacecraft or operator, rather than explicitly modeling the coupled decision-making process that arises when multiple active spacecraft respond to the same conjunction. When multiple active spacecraft are involved in a close encounter, conjunction resolution naturally be-comes a multi-agent planning problem. The maneuver selected by one operator alters the feasible and safe ac-tions available to the others, leading to a coupled planning problem between actors, rather than an independent optimization. Recent work has explored this interaction through game-theoretic models 15, 16 and multi-agent coordination strategies, 17 particularly in the context of constellation management and autonomous satellite operations. These approaches demonstrate the value of reasoning jointly over multiple spacecraft. However, comparatively little attention has been given to the operational planning process immediately following con-junction notification, where multiple operators must rapidly construct a coordinated avoidance strategy under uncertainty before maneuver execution. Collaborative maneuver planning is further complicated by the realities of space-ground communication. Operators receive updated tracking information only during intermittent ground contacts, producing delayed state estimates and limited opportunities for coordination. 18, 19 In operational settings, this prevents contin-uous communication and synchronized state knowledge across all participants. This exposes a gap between fully centralized approaches, which assume complete information and unrestricted coordination, and fully decentralized methods, where agents make decisions independently and do not leverage coordination when communication opportunities are available. In addition, existing work rarely models the information propa-gation structure explicitly within the decision-making process, such as intermittent ground contacts and the cost of coordination itself. To address this gap, we formulate collaborative spacecraft conjunction avoidance as a semi-decentralized partially observable Markov decision process (SDec-POMDP), 20 where synchronization opportunities are derived directly from predicted ground-station visibility windows. Rather than assuming either continuous coordination or completely independent planning, the proposed formulation explicitly models when operators regain updated spacecraft information and can synchronize their decisions throughout conjunction resolution. This communication structure naturally captures the asynchronous information flow characteristic of opera-tional collision avoidance while bridging the spectrum between fully centralized and fully decentralized plan-ning. The resulting SDec-POMDP is solved using approximate Recursive Small-Step Semi-Decentralized A* (RS-SDA*), 21 an approximate heuristic search algorithm for computing near-optimal joint policies under a specified communication schedule, and is tailored here to autonomous spacecraft conjunction avoidance. The contributions of this work are threefold. First, we introduce an SDec-POMDP formulation for collab-orative spacecraft conjunction avoidance that explicitly incorporates intermittent ground-station communica-2tion into an otherwise decentralized planning process, allowing planners to synchronize their information dur-ing scheduled communication opportunities while making maneuver decisions independently between syn-chronization events. Second, we demonstrate that communication-aware planning recovers near-centralized maneuver quality with 28.5% fewer operator information-sharing events than continuous coordination, and characterize which communication opportunities throughout a conjunction are most valuable for coordinated planning. Third, we compare optimized semi-decentralized policies against representative rule-based op-erator heuristics, demonstrating that communication-aware optimization more consistently achieves the de-sired operational miss-distance band while minimizing unnecessary mission deviation. Collectively, these results establish semi-decentralized planning as a practical framework for autonomous multi-operator colli-sion avoidance under ground-contact-derived synchronization constraints. 

PROBLEM FORMULATION 

We consider the problem of a spacecraft conjunction scenario involving two active, maneuverable satellites, 

s1 and s2, with different operators. The relative state of s1 to s2 is represented in a radial–tangential–normal (RTN) coordinate frame 

x = [ pR, p T , p N , v R, v T , v N ] (1) outlining the radial, along-track, cross-track positions and velocities. Each spacecraft is capable of executing impulsive maneuvers by applying a fixed-magnitude ∆v in the positive or negative along-track direction. This restriction reflects the primary objective of collision avoidance through relative phasing control. A conjunction is defined to occur when the relative miss distance m falls below a screening threshold of 

5 km during the time horizon leading up to the time of closest approach (TCA), consistent with standard con-junction screening practices from NASA and the US Space Force. 22 For each conjunction, our formulation adopts a finite 24-hour planning horizon prior to TCA. This choice reflects the rapid growth of state uncer-tainty in conjunction predictions, which significantly limits the predictive fidelity of CDM-based information beyond a few days prior to closest approach. The resulting decision window focuses planning on the period in which maneuver tradeoffs are most informed and operationally relevant. The 24-hour planning horizon is event-driven, defined as an ordered sequence of decision stages before TCA. Decision stages k occur every two hours, with additional decision stages corresponding to synchronization opportunities induced by pre-dicted ground-station visibility. At every decision stage, whether periodic or synchronization-induced, each spacecraft updates its local belief and selects its next maneuver according to its local policy. Policies are generated offline and uploaded before execution and define a mapping from the agent’s current belief of the state to the appropriate maneuver decision. The ground segment serves as the mechanism for reconciling shared information rather than as the decision-making agent. 

Decision Making Regimes. We define three operational decision-making regimes over this horizon, all initialized from a shared initial belief b0, or a probabilistic estimate of the system state, derived from the CDM. The three planning regimes differ only in which decision stages permit information synchronization. In the centralized setting, information is synchronized at every decision stage k, allowing both spacecraft to maintain a common belief throughout execution and providing an upper bound on achievable planning perfor-mance. In the decentralized setting, synchronization never occurs after the initial belief b0, so each spacecraft updates only its local belief and executes its local policy independently. In contrast, the semi-decentralized setting lies between these extremes: agents also begin from b0, but alternate between decentralized execution and synchronized information updates. Here, synchronization occurs only at decision stages for which both spacecraft have completed their scheduled ground-station contacts. At these synchronization stages, updated state information becomes available to both spacecraft, allowing their local beliefs to be reconciled before the next action is selected. Between synchronization stages, each spacecraft updates its local belief using only locally available information and executes its local policy independently. 

Ground-Station-Derived Synchronization Schedule 

The remaining question is therefore which decision stages permit information synchronization in the semi-decentralized setting. In our semi-decentralized formulation, information exchange is determined entirely 3Figure 1. Ground-station-derived synchronization schedule. Individual spacecraft contact windows determine when each vehicle contributes information to the ground-side shared-information state. After both spacecraft have established contact, a syn-chronization stage is introduced in which the reconciled information is made available to both agents before decentralized execution resumes. 

by predicted ground-station visibility, as in practice, spacecraft cannot be assumed to remain in continuous communication with their terrestrial operators. Although some telecommunications constellations maintain near-continuous connectivity, Earth-observation, scientific, and other missions often communicate with their operators only during discrete contact windows. We assume that the spacecraft do not communicate directly with one another. Instead, updated state estimates, conjunction information, and maneuver execution data must first be transmitted to the ground and shared with the other operator through existing ground-segment coordination channels, such as Space-Track.org or operator websites. This dissemination is modeled as an idealized information-sharing mechanism rather than representing the detailed operational workflow. At each synchronization stage, we abstract the complete downlink, ground-side dissemination, and return availabil-ity of the reconciled information to both agents as a single information-sharing event, without separately modeling the associated transmission delays. Because the spacecraft generally encounter different contact windows, these updates become available asynchronously. We therefore use predicted ground-station visibil-ity to determine the subset of decision stages at which information synchronization is permitted. To construct the synchronization schedule, we use the predicted ephemeris of spacecraft si and the lo-cations of its supporting ground-station network Li to compute the corresponding ground-station contact windows Ci over the planning horizon. A synchronization stage is introduced once updated spacecraft in-formation from both vehicles has become available through their respective ground-station contacts. Oper-ationally, this corresponds to the later of the two contact opportunities, after which updated state estimates and maneuver execution data from both spacecraft are available for reconciliation. The resulting sequence of synchronization decision stages is denoted by Csync . Because future ground-station visibility depends only on orbital geometry and known ground-station locations, Csync can be computed a priori and remains fixed throughout offline policy generation and subsequent online policy execution. Consequently, synchronization stages are not decision variables, but fixed inputs to the planning problem. Figure 1 illustrates how individual spacecraft contact windows are mapped to the resulting synchronization schedule. Between synchronization events, each spacecraft independently updates its local belief using its own ob-servations, maneuver history, and the absence of newly shared information. Because no information is ex-changed during this period, the two local beliefs may gradually diverge. At each synchronization event, 4the operators share updated state information, allowing the spacecraft to reconcile their local beliefs before resuming policy execution. The planner explicitly reasons over this future information structure, allowing maneuver decisions made prior to synchronization to account for the additional information that will become available afterward. With this formulation, the communication structure is prescribed by predicted ground-station visibility rather than optimized during planning. The planner therefore optimizes maneuver decisions under a known schedule of future information availability, explicitly reasoning about how upcoming synchronization oppor-tunities influence current maneuver decisions. We now formulate this communication-constrained collision avoidance problem as a semi-decentralized partially observable Markov decision process, where Csync defines the communication structure of the multi-agent system. 

Multi-Spacecraft Collision Avoidance SDec-POMDP 

A SDec-POMDP extends the standard partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) framework to a multi-agent setting with structured communication constraints. A semi-decentralized partially observable Markov decision process is defined as the tuple 

(I, S, ¯A, ¯O, F, T, O, R ) (2) where I denotes the set of agents, S is the shared state space, ¯A = ×i∈I Ai is the joint action space, and 

¯O = ×i∈I Oi is the joint observation space. In the SDec-POMDP, F is a cumulative distribution function governing the likelihood that agents enter a synchronization stage, conditioned on the current state and joint action. F encodes the synchronization schedule Csync defined by the ground-station communication model, outlining when agents may share information to reconcile their beliefs before executing their joint policy. The system evolves according to a transition function T (s′ | s, ¯a), which defines the probability of transi-tioning to state s′ ∈ S given current state s ∈ S and joint action ¯a ∈ ¯A. Each agent receives observations according to an observation function O(¯ o | s′, ¯a), which specifies the probability of joint observation ¯o ∈ ¯O

after transitioning to state s′ under joint action ¯a. The reward function R(s, ¯a) encodes collision avoidance performance, maneuver cost, and mission objectives. In the multi-spacecraft collision avoidance SDec-POMDP, all communication variants (centralized, semi-decentralized, decentralized) share the same state/action/transition/reward model. They differ only in the information synchronization structure, encoded through synchronization/memory propagation, and the avail-ability of shared observations. 

State Space. A straightforward representation of the conjunction state would model the full six-dimensional relative spacecraft state x in the RTN frame from Equation (1), where (pR, p T , p N ) and (vR, v T , v N ) denote the relative position and velocity components between the two spacecraft. However, directly discretizing this six-dimensional state space results in a prohibitively large offline planning problem. Rather than tracking the full RTN state throughout the encounter, we consider the state of the conjunction event itself, in particular the predicted relative position at the time of closest approach, as the core state information used to inform decision-making. * The relative miss distance at TCA is given by 

m =

q

p2 

> R

+ p2 

> T

+ p2 

> N

(3) where (pR, p T , p N ) are the components of the predicted relative position at TCA. However, miss distance alone is insufficient as a planning state. Two conjunctions with identical miss distances may require different maneuver decisions depending on whether the spacecraft are predicted to pass ahead of or behind one another and whether previous maneuvers have introduced accumulated orbital drift. To enable tractable planning while preserving information relevant for decision-making, we exploit the fact that maneuver authority is restricted to fixed-magnitude impulsive burns in the along-track direction. While such burns produce coupled perturbations in all RTN components, their dominant first-order effect is a change 

> *A formulation based on probability of collision is also possible, but is considered as future work.

5Figure 2. Reduction of the six-dimensional RTN relative state to the reduced planning state. The along-track component δp T represents the maneuver-dependent portion of the predicted miss distance at TCA, while the radial and cross-track components are combined into the perpendicular distance p⊥ = pp2 

> R

+ p2 

> N

, which is treated as fixed over the planning horizon. Together, these quantities satisfy m = pδp 2 

> T

+ p2 

> ⊥

and define the reduced state used by the SDec-POMDP. 

in semi-major axis, which induces a differential orbital period between the two spacecraft under the near-circular, small-δv regime considered. Over the encounter horizon, this results in secular growth of the relative along-track separation between the two spacecraft in the RTN frame. Radial and cross-track components are weakly affected through higher-order coupling and do not contribute significantly to the leading-order variation in miss distance at TCA for the conjunction scenarios considered. Appendix A provides a detailed validation of this approximation. Preserving the information relevant for decision-making while substantially reducing the state dimension-ality, we represent each conjunction using the reduced state 

s = ( δp T , v dev ,1, v dev ,2, k ) (4) where δp T denotes the signed along-track separation at TCA, vdev ,i represents the accumulated along-track velocity deviation for spacecraft i, and k denotes the decision stage. The decision stage is included because the problem is finite-horizon; the remaining time until TCA determines both the available maneuver opportu-nities and the resulting transition dynamics. The radial and cross-track components of the predicted relative position at TCA are summarized by the scalar 

p⊥ =

q

p2 

> R

+ p2 

> N

(5) which represents the component of the miss distance treated as fixed by the reduced model. Since along-track impulsive maneuvers have negligible influence on p⊥ over the planning horizon considered (refer to Appendix A), this quantity is treated as a scenario-specific constant rather than a state variable. Different values of p⊥ therefore represent different ways in which the predicted TCA separation is distributed between the along-track direction and the combined radial and cross-track directions. This reduced representation is more informative than representing miss distance alone. In addition to the overall separation magnitude, it preserves (i) the sign of the along-track displacement, distinguishing whether the spacecraft are predicted to pass ahead of or behind one another; (ii) the accumulated orbital drift induced by previous maneuvers through the velocity deviation terms; and (iii) the decomposition of the miss distance into a maneuver-dependent along-track component and a perpendicular component treated as fixed by the reduced model. In particular, including the velocity deviation terms preserves the Markov property of the model, since conjunctions with identical along-track separation but different accumulated drift evolve differently under identical control actions. 6Finally, because the offline SDec-POMDP solver requires finite state and transition spaces, each component of the reduced state is discretized into a finite number of bins. This reduced representation enables tractable offline policy computation while retaining the dominant dynamics governing along-track collision avoidance. The discretization procedure is described in the Experimental Setup section. 

Action Space. Each spacecraft si has a discrete action set Ai = {wait , +∆ v, −∆v}, where all maneuvers are modeled as impulsive along-track velocity burns of fixed magnitude of 0.5 m/s, applied in either the positive or negative along track direction. 23, 24 For the transition model, these actions are encoded by ai ∈{− 1, 0, +1 }, corresponding to −∆v, wait, and +∆ v, respectively. For a two-spacecraft system, the joint action space is given by the Cartesian product ¯A = A1 × A 2, yielding nine joint actions per stage. Both spacecraft act simultaneously at each decision stage. To maintain a compact finite state space, each spacecraft is limited to one uncompensated maneuver in either direction, while counter-maneuvers remain available to return the velocity-deviation state toward its nominal value; additional velocity-deviation levels could be incorporated at the cost of a larger state space. 

Observation Space. Each spacecraft receives only a partial observation of the underlying conjunction state. The local observation for spacecraft i is oi = ( δp T , v dev ,i ), where vdev ,i is the spacecraft’s own velocity deviation, assumed to be observed without error because each operator knows its own maneuver history. The signed along-track separation δp T is shared between agents only during synchronization events. At synchronization stages, both operators receive a common observation of the current along-track sepa-ration, allowing them to reconcile their beliefs regarding the conjunction state before continuing execution. Between synchronization events, no updated observation of δp T is available and the observation instead takes a distinguished null value indicating the absence of new information. Consequently, each agent’s observa-tion alphabet consists of the discretized along-track bins together with the null observation and the possible velocity deviation levels. The joint observation space is given by ¯O = O1 × O 2, with the observation function factorizing across agents. The communication architecture considered in this work therefore modifies only the observation model while leaving the underlying state dynamics unchanged. Centralized, semi-decentralized, and decen-tralized planning differ solely in the stages at which shared observations are available. In the centralized setting, synchronization occurs at every decision stage. In the decentralized setting, synchronization never occurs and each operator observes only its own velocity deviation throughout the planning horizon. The semi-decentralized setting lies between these extremes, with synchronization events induced by predicted ground-station contact opportunities. 

Transition Model. The transition function T (s′ | s, ¯a) describes how the conjunction state evolves under the joint action ¯a = ( a1, a 2). The state includes a predicted along-track separation at time of closest ap-proach, denoted δp T . This quantity represents the separation at TCA assuming no further maneuvers and therefore evolves as a forward-predicted metric rather than a propagated orbital state. The stage index ad-vances deterministically as k → k + 1 , yielding a finite-horizon, stage-dependent Markov decision process. A maneuver action updates the velocity deviation state vdev ,i as 

v′ 

> dev ,i

= vdev ,i + ai ai ∈ {− 1, 0, +1 } (6) where vdev ,i is expressed in units of the fixed maneuver magnitude ∆v and ai represents the maneuver increment applied at the current stage. The joint action induces a signed relative maneuver increment 

arel = a1 + a2. For the predicted along-track separation at TCA, the state variable δp T is updated as 

δp ′ 

> T

= δp T + arel r(k) (7) where r(k) is the signed change in along-track separation at TCA produced by an impulsive maneuver applied at stage k. This maneuver response is computed by propagating the maneuvered and nominal trajectories from stage k to TCA and evaluating the resulting difference in along-track separation. Because r(k) is defined directly as a displacement at TCA, its dependence on the remaining time to TCA is already incorporated through orbital propagation. The continuous maneuver response is then discretized to construct the transition matrix T . Since δp T already reflects previously accumulated displacement, only the change in velocity 7deviation produced by the current joint action contributes to the update. This ensures that counter-maneuvers stop further divergence without undoing previously accumulated separation. To model uncertainty, Gaussian noise is added to the deterministic update prior to discretization. The total variance is composed of two independent sources: process uncertainty, which grows with time until TCA (tgo (k)) , and maneuver execution uncertainty, which accounts for independent execution errors in each maneuver commanded at the current stage 

σ2(k, ¯a) = σ2

> proc

(k) + σ2

> man

(k, ¯a) (8) where 

σproc (k) = 0 .15 km 

√h

q

tgo (k) σman (k, ¯a) = 0 .02 |r(k)|p|a1| + |a2| (9) and maneuver execution errors associated with simultaneous burns are treated as independent and combined in quadrature. The signed mean maneuver effect is captured by arel . The resulting stochastic update is 

˜δp ′ 

> T

∼ N  δp T + arel r(k), σ 2(k, ¯a) (10) This distribution is then projected onto the discretized state space to obtain the transition probabilities. 

Reward Function. The reward is designed to capture three competing operational objectives in spacecraft conjunction resolution: (i) ensuring safe separation at time of closest approach, (ii) limiting unnecessary along-track phasing offsets that incur post-encounter recovery cost, and (iii) minimizing the number of im-pulsive maneuvers. We define the reward as the sum of three components: 

R(s, ¯a) = Rrisk (m) + Rdisp (δp T ) + Rman (¯ a) (11) where m is the miss distance at TCA and δp T is the predicted along-track separation at TCA, both derived from the state representation. This single reward function sums up contributions from both agents into one scalar that the team jointly optimizes. A visualization of the interaction between different reward parameters is provided in Figure 3. The risk component penalizes close approaches at TCA. It attains its minimum when the miss distance falls below a collision threshold and smoothly decays to zero outside the screening volume 

Rrisk (m) = 



−10 4, m ≤ 1 km ,

−10 4 · 1+cos (π m−15−1 ) 

> 2

, 1 < m < 5 km ,

0, m ≥ 5 km .

(12) to reflect standard conjunction screening practice, where separations beyond the screening volume do not provide additional reward. To avoid solutions that over-separate spacecraft, we penalize excessive along-track offsets 

Rdisp (δp T ) = 

(

0, |δp T | ≤ 5 km ,

−0.2 · (|δp T | − 5) 2, |δp T | > 5 km . (13) to encourage solutions that resolve the conjunction while remaining close to the nominal orbital phasing corridor. The quadratic form reflects increasing cost of orbital restoration for larger deviations. Finally, each impulsive burn incurs a fixed penalty cman 

Rman (¯ a) = −cman · (|a1| + |a2|), (14) to discourage excessive actuation, set to cman = 2 for our experiments. Together, these terms define a structured objective in which collision avoidance dominates, while secondary costs shape operationally realistic behavior. The reward is fully parameterized and can be adapted to different operator preferences without modifying the underlying SDec-POMDP formulation. 8PLANNING METHODOLOGY 

This section describes the planning and analysis methodology used throughout this work. First, colli-sion avoidance policies are computed using approximate Recursive Small-Step Semi-Decentralized A* (RS-SDA*), which solves the communication-constrained SDec-POMDP formulated in the previous section. We then introduce a synchronization schedule-reduction procedure that identifies a locally minimal subset of ground-station synchronization opportunities needed to recover near-centralized planning performance. 

Solution Method: Approximate Recursive Small-Step Semi-Decentralized A* 

The proposed problem is solved using approximate Recursive Small-Step Semi-Decentralized A* (RS-SDA*), 21 an approximate offline planner for SDec-POMDPs. The state, action, and observation spaces are discretized into finite sets to enable offline policy computation prior to execution. Given the discretized state, action, observation, transition, and reward models together with the synchronization schedule derived from predicted ground-station visibility, approximate RS-SDA* computes a performant joint maneuver policy over the finite planning horizon. Unlike conventional centralized planners, approximate RS-SDA* explicitly reasons over changing com-munication availability throughout execution. Between synchronization events, each spacecraft executes its local policy using its current belief, absent of any updated shared conjunction information. When a synchro-nization event occurs, the planner temporarily reasons over the shared belief state generated from updated information received by both operators, allowing coordinated maneuver decisions before returning to de-centralized execution. This naturally matches the communication structure of conjunction resolution, where operators periodically exchange updated spacecraft information but otherwise act independently. Approximate RS-SDA* incrementally constructs the joint policy through heuristic search over partially specified policies, expanding only the portions of the policy space required to identify high-quality solutions. Computational tractability is achieved through incremental expansion and pruning of suboptimal partial poli-cies. 21 The resulting policy specifies the maneuver each spacecraft should execute as a function of its locally propagated belief and the synchronized information available following communication events. In combi-nation with the SDec-POMDP formulation presented above, the planner explicitly accounts for both orbital 0 5 10 15 20 25            

> Miss distance at TCA (km)
> 0
> -1
> -10
> -100
> -1000
> -10000
> Terminal reward (signed-log scale)
> Optimum Reward at 5km
> 1km zone – maximum penalty 5km cleared screening zone total terminal reward risk ramp (near-field collision) displacement ramp ∝(|δp T| − tube) 2
> 4.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
> Miss distance at TCA (km)
> 0
> -1
> -2
> Reward (signed-log)
> Zoom: tradeoff at optimum

Figure 3. Terminal reward as a function of the miss distance at TCA, plotted on a signed-log scale. A risk ramp (red, floor −10 ,000 inside the 1 km collision zone, cleared by 5 km ) opposes a quadratic displacement ramp (purple, growing past the 

5 km station-keeping tube); their sum (grey) peaks at the ≈5 km “clear-and-stop” op-timum (star). Inset: the 4−7 km handoff. The reward favors clearing the threshold with minimal ∆v, not maximizing separation. 

9uncertainty and the operational communication constraints imposed by intermittent ground-station contacts. 

Synchronization Schedule Reduction 

Although the synchronization schedule derived from ground-station visibility may contain many commu-nication opportunities, it is unclear which of these synchronization events are actually necessary to recover centralized planning performance. Approximate RS-SDA* assumes that the synchronization schedule is specified a priori as part of the planning model. 21 As a result, the synchronization schedule is treated as a fixed input rather than a decision variable during planning. To better understand the impact of information exchange between operators, we introduce a synchronization schedule reduction methodology. The proposed approach identifies a subset of synchronization events sufficient to recover near-centralized performance rela-tive to the full ground-station schedule. Identifying such a reduced set provides insight into where information exchange is most valuable during conjunction resolution. As described in the problem formulation, the planning horizon consists of a sequence of decision stages 

k. The centralized baseline synchronizes at every decision stage, yielding expected return Rcen . In the SDec-POMDP formulation, synchronization is permitted only at the ground-station-derived synchronization stages, denoted by Csync . Any candidate synchronization schedule is represented by a subset C ⊆ C sync ,where C contains a subset of information synchronization events available to the planner. For any candidate schedule C, let J(C) denote the expected return obtained by solving the corresponding SDec-POMDP with synchronization restricted to the events in C. The decentralized baseline therefore corresponds to the empty synchronization schedule, 

Rdec = J(∅) (15) where both Rdec and Rcen define the lower and upper performance bounds, respectively. Rather than exhaustively evaluating every possible subset of synchronization stages, whose complexity grows exponentially with |C sync |, we employ a greedy synchronization schedule-reduction procedure to iden-tify a locally minimal synchronization schedule Csub . Starting from an initial synchronization schedule Csync ,the algorithm repeatedly attempts to remove a single synchronization event. A removal is accepted only if re-solving the resulting SDec-POMDP produces a policy whose expected return remains within a prescribed tolerance of the centralized solution. This process continues until no remaining synchronization event can be removed without violating the performance criterion. Candidate schedules are evaluated according to their expected return J(Csub ), and are considered equivalent to centralized planning whenever 

J(Csub ) ≥ Rcen − τ. (16) where τ is a small numerical tolerance used to account for floating-point error. Throughout this work, we use 

τ = 0 .001 , effectively requiring the reduced schedule to reproduce centralized performance. Because each candidate schedule requires solving a new SDec-POMDP, evaluating many schedules is computationally expensive. To reduce the number of required policy solves, the search is initialized from a burn-centered synchronization schedule rather than the complete schedule. We first compute the centroid of maneuver activity in the centralized solution and construct an initial candidate schedule Csub by retaining half of the synchronization opportunities in Csync , centered about this maneuver epoch. If this burn-centered schedule satisfies the centralized performance criterion, greedy synchronization removal proceeds from this initialization. Otherwise, the algorithm falls back to the complete synchronization schedule Csync . This warm-start heuristic is motivated by the intuition that information synchronization is most valuable near maneuver execution, reducing the number of expensive SDec-POMDP solves required during the search. Algorithm 1 outlines the approach. 

EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

The proposed semi-decentralized collision avoidance framework is evaluated using synthetic conjunction scenarios representative of operational LEO encounters. Each experimental instance consists of a conjunc-tion geometry, a ground-station-derived synchronization schedule, and a scenario-specific SDec-POMDP 10 Algorithm 1 Greedy Synchronization Schedule Reduction 

Require: Full schedule Csync , tolerance τ , expected return of centralized policy Rcen  

> 1:

Initialize Csub using the burn-centered schedule if J(Csub ) ≥ Rcen − τ ; otherwise set Csub ← C sync  

> 2:

repeat  

> 3:

for all c ∈ C sub do  

> 4:

if J(Csub \ { c}) ≥ Rcen − τ then  

> 5:

Csub ← C sub \ { c} 

> 6:

break  

> 7:

until no synchronization event can be removed  

> 8:

return Csub 

constructed from high-fidelity orbital propagation. The following subsections describe the ground-station network, conjunction generation procedure, state discretization, and policy evaluation methodology. 

Ground-Station Network 

Ground-station visibility is modeled using a static six-station subset of the KSAT network, 18 shown in Fig. 4, consisting of Svalbard, Troll, Hawaii, Singapore, Weilheim, and Awarua. This geographically dis-tributed configuration provides representative global coverage while preserving intermittent communication opportunities between operators. Rather than modeling the complete commercial network, we use a reduced six-station subset, as near-continuous contacts would eliminate meaningful communication constraints by effectively synchronizing the operators at nearly every decision stage. For simplicity, both spacecraft are assumed to share the same six-station ground network. Since ground-station contact windows are computed independently for each spacecraft prior to constructing the synchronization schedule, alternative operator-specific ground-station networks can be incorporated by simply assigning different station sets to each space-craft. Ground-station contacts are modeled as deterministic visibility windows that define when each space-180 ° 150 °W 120 °W 90 °W 60 °W 30 °W 0° 30 °E 60 °E 90 °E 120 °E 150 °E 180 ° 

> 60 °S30 °S0°
> 30 °N60 °N
> Ground-station network and communication cones ( εmin = 10 ◦)
> Ground station Visibility footprint, 550 km Visibility footprint, 800 km Visibility footprint, 1200 km

Figure 4. Six-station ground network used throughout the experiments. Commu-nication footprints correspond to a minimum elevation angle of 10 ◦. Ground-station visibility windows derived from this network determine the synchronization opportu-nities used by the semi-decentralized planner. 

craft can receive updated state estimates and conjunction information. Contact windows are computed using the Brahe library 25 with a minimum elevation angle of 10 ◦. All orbit propagation is performed using a numerical (special perturbations) propagator with a LEO force model including Earth’s oblateness ( J2), at-mospheric drag, solar radiation pressure, and third-body perturbations. Because the two spacecraft generally experience different contact schedules, synchronization events are defined by the later of the two spacecraft contact opportunities, representing the earliest time at which both operators possess updated spacecraft infor-11 Table 1. Conjunction scenario parameters used for experimental evaluation. Parameter Values 

Number of scenarios 52 Reference altitude (SC1) 550, 800, 1200 km 

Encounter miss distance 1, 2, 5, 10 km 

Plane-crossing angle ( ∆i) 0◦–115 ◦

Encounter angle 3◦–90 ◦

Orbit type Near-circular LEO ECI x (km) ECI y (km) 

> XY
> SC1
> ECI x (km) ECI z (km)
> XZ
> ECI y (km) ECI z (km)
> YZ
> 020 40 60 80 100 120
> Plane-crossing angle ∆ i (deg)

Figure 5. The 52-conjunction evaluation suite, shown as the Earth-centered inertial (ECI) orbit of the secondary spacecraft (SC2) for each scenario. The three panels show the xy , xz , and yz projections of ECI space. The Earth is shown in gray and the primary spacecraft (SC1) reference orbit in black. Each colored ellipse represents one SC2 orbit, colored by the plane-crossing angle ∆i = |i2 − i1| (dark blue: near-coplanar; red: steep crossings). Orbit segments passing behind the Earth are shown as dashed. The scenarios span representative LEO conjunction geometries across the parameter ranges summarized in Table 1. 

mation. This idealized ground-based information exchange defines the synchronization schedule used by the semi-decentralized planner for each conjunction scenario. 

Conjunction Scenario Generation 

Evaluation is performed over 52 representative near-circular LEO conjunction scenarios generated using a parameterized encounter generator as depicted in Figure 5. Candidate conjunctions are restricted to physi-cally realizable near-circular LEO orbits representative of contemporary operational satellites. Although the proposed SDec-POMDP formulation can be adapted to other orbital regimes through appropriate dynamics and communication models, this work’s evaluation is limited to LEO, where ground-station contact patterns and encounter dynamics differ substantially from those in MEO, GEO, and highly eccentric orbits. Candi-date secondary spacecraft are therefore required to satisfy feasibility constraints on perigee altitude, apogee altitude, and orbital eccentricity before inclusion in the evaluation set. Our evaluation suite spans a broad range of conjunction geometries, reference altitudes, and plane-crossing configurations representative of operational LEO encounters. Candidate conjunctions are propagated and verified using the Brahe astrodynamics library 25 to ensure the desired closest-approach geometry before inclusion in our test set for evaluation. The resulting dataset provides broad coverage of representative LEO collision geometries while maintaining physically realizable spacecraft orbits. Table 1 provides the swept conjunction scenario parameters. Initial miss distances of 1, 2, and 5 km represent conjunctions within or near the screening volume, while the 10 km cases serve as screened-out control scenarios for evaluating whether the planners avoid unnecessary maneuvering. 12 State Discretization 

To build an offline solution via approximate RS-SDA*, the reduced SDec-POMDP state is partitioned into discrete intervals. Each state component is discretized to capture the dominant maneuver-induced state transitions while preserving maneuver-relevant decision boundaries. The resulting discretization is scenario-dependent, since both the planning horizon and the number of available synchronization stages are determined by the conjunction geometry and the ground station contact schedule. 

Along-track separation. The along-track state δp T is discretized using a signed, non-uniform binning scheme derived from maneuver-induced transition structure. Rather than imposing a uniform grid, bin edges are constructed based on the expected along-track displacement resulting from impulsive maneuvers applied at different time indices within the planning horizon. This is implemented via a deterministic edge-generation procedure that maps time-indexed maneuver effects into state-space boundaries. To ensure consistency with the reward and evaluation structure, several bin edges are anchored at key op-erational thresholds, specifically {± 1, ±4, ±5, ±7} km, corresponding to the collision threshold, the desired operational-band boundaries, and the screening and displacement threshold. Additional bin edges are gener-ated by computing the along-track displacement produced by representative impulsive maneuvers executed at each decision epoch. The resulting displacements at TCA are then used as state boundaries, extending the discretization to approximately ±50 km. This aligns bin boundaries with predicted maneuver outcomes, reducing aliasing between states that would otherwise require different control decisions. A central bin span-ning [−1, 1] km is used to capture the collision-sensitive region. Beyond ±50 km, absorbing tail bins are introduced to close the state space. Depending on the scenario configuration, this construction yields approx-imately 20–30 signed bins. This non-uniform discretization better preserves the maneuver-induced transition structure while maintaining a compact state representation. 

Velocity deviation. Each spacecraft maintains a discrete velocity deviation variable vdev ,i ∈ {− 1, 0, +1 }

representing negative, nominal, and positive along-track drift relative to the reference trajectory. This coarse representation is sufficient to distinguish initial avoidance burns from corrective counter-maneuvers while maintaining computational tractability. Repeated maneuvers in the same direction are excluded in the present formulation, although additional velocity-deviation levels could be incorporated by expanding the state space. Across the evaluated scenarios, the resulting optimized policies did not require multiple same-direction ma-neuvers. 

Planning stage. The planning stage variable k is induced by the ordered sequence of planning events, which includes both regularly spaced decision epochs and, when applicable, ground-station contact oppor-tunities. In the nominal setting, decision epochs occur every two hours over a 24-hour planning horizon. Ground-station contacts computed from orbital visibility introduce additional planning stages when they do not coincide with an existing decision epoch; otherwise, they are merged with the nearest decision stage. In the centralized formulation, agents synchronize at every planning stage. In the decentralized formulation, agents never synchronize and therefore evolve independently throughout the planning horizon. In the semi-decentralized formulation, synchronization is restricted to planning stages associated with ground-station contact opportunities. 

Model Construction and Policy Evaluation 

Once the discrete state space has been defined, scenario-specific transition, observation, and reward models are constructed before solving each conjunction’s SDec-POMDP. The transition, observation, and reward models are generated directly from high-fidelity orbital propagation rather than manually specified transition probabilities. Ground-station visibility determines the synchronization schedule, after which the effect of an impulsive along-track maneuver at each planning stage is computed. These maneuver responses define the transition dynamics and corresponding discretization of the along-track state. Transition probabilities account for process drift and maneuver execution uncertainty through Monte Carlo sampling, while the reward model combines collision-risk penalties, trajectory-deviation costs, and maneuver penalties. The resulting tensors define a scenario-specific SDec-POMDP that is solved offline using approximate RS-SDA*. 13 0 10 20 30 40 50 

Miss distance at TCA (km)                 

> Centralized Semi-decentralized Decentralized Threshold ×threshold Selfish ×selfish Fixed-lead ×fixed-lead Threshold ×selfish Threshold ×fixed-lead Selfish ×fixed-lead
> Unsafe
> <4 km Safe 4–7 km Over-mitigated ( >10 km)
> 60% in target band
> 61% in target band
> 28% in target band
> 17% in target band
> 21% in target band
> 25% in target band
> 18% in target band
> 21% in target band
> 25% in target band
> Box = exact quartiles (q1/median/q3), whiskers p05–p95, = mean.
> Optimized planners  Representative operator heuristics

Figure 6. Comparison of optimized planners and representative operator heuristic strategies over Monte Carlo conjunction rollouts. Shaded regions indicate the unsafe conjunction regime ( <4 km), the desired operational miss-distance band (4–7 km), and increasingly conservative over-mitigation ( >10 km). Optimized planners consis-tently target the desired operating region, whereas representative heuristic operators generally satisfy the safety objective by producing substantially larger-than-necessary miss distances. Boxes indicate the interquartile range, whiskers denote the 5th–95th percentiles, diamonds show the mean, and percentages indicate the fraction of roll-outs within the target operating band. 

Policies are computed offline using the discretized SDec-POMDP model but evaluated through closed-loop propagation in the continuous Brahe astrodynamics environment. Each conjunction is evaluated using 200 Monte Carlo rollouts in the continuous Brahe propagation environment. During each rollout, the continuous spacecraft state is mapped to the corresponding discrete belief state, the policy selects a joint maneuver, and the resulting impulsive burn is applied before propagating the spacecraft to the next planning stage. This evaluation procedure isolates approximation error to the policy synthesis stage while ensuring that reported miss distances and maneuver trajectories reflect the underlying continuous orbital dynamics rather than the discretized planning model. 

RESULTS 

Our proposed semi-decentralized framework is evaluated across a representative synthetic suite of conjunc-tion scenarios and compared against fully centralized planning with continuous synchronization and fully de-centralized planning without information exchange. Each method’s performance is assessed using minimum miss distance at TCA, mission trajectory deviation, and overall planning reward. We first compare the opti-mized planners against representative heuristic operator strategies to quantify the value of coordinated plan-ning. We then examine whether synchronization restricted to ground-station visibility windows is sufficient to retain centralized planning performance. Finally, the available communication structure is progressively reduced to identify which synchronization opportunities contribute most to coordinated decision-making. 

Comparison with Representative Operator Heuristic Policies 

Current conjunction operations frequently rely on rule-based procedures rather than optimized multi-agent planning. We therefore first compare the proposed planners against representative heuristic operator poli-cies that approximate common operational decision philosophies, including threshold-based maneuvering, 14 independent selfish optimization, and fixed-lead maneuver scheduling. The methods are further outlined in Appendix B. Each heuristic selects maneuvers independently using only locally available information and does not optimize a joint policy under uncertainty. For all 52 conjunction scenarios, policies are evaluated using the same high-fidelity truth simulation. Accordingly, all reported final miss distances are determined from propagated spacecraft trajectories rather than from the reduced-order dynamics used during planning. Figure 6 compares the resulting miss-distance distributions for optimized planners and representative heuristic operator policies. Centralized and semi-decentralized planning consistently concentrate rollouts within the desired 4–7 km operational miss-distance band, with 60% and 61% of rollouts terminating within the target region, respectively. This is more than double the performance achieved by the decentralized planner, which reaches the target band in only 28% of rollouts despite remaining collision-free. The rep-resentative heuristic operator policies perform similarly to or worse than the decentralized planner, placing only 17%–25% of rollouts within the desired operating region while frequently producing unnecessarily large miss distances that correspond to excessive mission deviation. These results demonstrate that the primary benefit of the SDec-POMDP framework is not simply main-taining collision safety, but improving maneuver quality under realistic communication constraints. Whereas representative heuristic policies generally satisfy the safety objective by over-mitigating the conjunction, the optimized planners consistently recover solutions that remain close to the desired operational miss-distance band while minimizing unnecessary trajectory deviation. Communication-aware optimization therefore pro-vides benefits beyond collision avoidance alone, producing maneuver strategies that better satisfy both safety and mission-performance objectives than representative rule-based operator policies. 

Semi-Decentralized Performance Relative to Centralized Planning 

We next evaluate whether synchronization limited to realistic ground-station visibility windows is suffi-cient to recover the performance of fully centralized planning. Across 52 simulated conjunction scenarios, centralized, semi-decentralized, and fully decentralized planners are evaluated under identical conjunction geometries and maneuver constraints. Both spacecraft use the common ground-station network described in Figure 4; however, differences in orbital geometry produce distinct contact schedules for each conjunc-tion. Synthetic conjunctions are generated with initial expected miss distances of 1, 2, 5, and 10 km at TCA. Semi-decentralized policies synchronize only when both operators receive updated information follow-ing scheduled ground-station contacts, whereas centralized planning assumes continuous shared information 0 5 10       

> Miss distance at TCA (km)
> 0
> 500
> 1000
> Rollouts
> Initial miss: 1 km
> 1 km
> Decentralized
> Semi-Decentralized
> Centralized
> Ideal zone
> at TCA
> 0510
> Miss distance at TCA (km)
> Initial miss: 2 km
> 2 km
> 0510
> Miss distance at TCA (km)
> Initial miss: 5 km
> 5 km
> 0510
> Miss distance at TCA (km)
> Initial miss: 10 km
> 10 km
> Final Miss distance at TCA (km) by variant

Figure 7. Distribution of final miss distances at TCA across 52 simulated conjunctions for centralized, semi-decentralized, and decentralized planning. Results are shown for varying conjunction scenarios with starting miss distances at TCA set at 1, 2, 5, and 

10 km . Initial belief of the miss distance is set to a distribution with σ = 1.4 km around the true miss distance. Semi-decentralized planning closely matches the centralized solution across the conjunction suite while consistently outperforming fully decentral-ized planning under realistic ground-station synchronization constraints. The shaded green region denotes the desired miss-distance 4−7 km operational band. 

15 throughout execution. Figure 7 demonstrates that semi-decentralized planning closely reproduces the miss-distance distributions achieved by the centralized planner despite synchronization being restricted to realistic ground-station visibil-ity windows. The decentralized planner produces a noticeably broader miss-distance distribution, frequently maneuvering well beyond the desired operational band. Across the conjunction suite, centralized planning performs an average of 27.2 synchronization events, whereas the semi-decentralized planner requires only 19.4, representing a 28.5% reduction in communica-tion. Despite this reduction, both approaches produce identical average planning returns, identical mean propagated miss distances (6.95 km), and indistinguishable maneuver deviations to numerical precision, with zero collisions observed across all evaluated scenarios. By contrast, the fully decentralized planner eliminates synchronization entirely but experiences reduced planning performance, yielding lower average returns and larger propagated miss distances (7.94 km). Although the fully decentralized planner achieves lower overall performance, no evaluated rollout for any coordination strategy falls below the 1 km collision threshold. Its principal disadvantage is instead maneuver quality, as it more frequently over-mitigates the conjunction and terminates outside the desired operational band, although this conservatism is less pronounced than that of the representative operator-heuristic strate-gies. This indicates that a jointly generated collision avoidance policy, computed from the initial conjunction assessment and executed without subsequent information updates, remains sufficiently conservative to satisfy the highest-priority operational objective of preventing collision. Once safety is assured, the principal benefit of additional communication shifts from collision avoidance to mission efficiency. Periodic synchronization enables operators to incorporate updated spacecraft state estimates and maneuver execution information as the conjunction evolves, reducing unnecessary conservatism without sacrificing the achieved safety margin. Consequently, semi-decentralized coordination recovers centralized planning performance with substantially fewer synchronization events, providing a practical balance between operational communication constraints and maneuver efficiency. These results establish semi-decentralized planning as an effective compromise be-tween the unrealistic assumption of continuous coordination and the conservatism of completely independent planning. 

Identifying Critical Synchronization Opportunities 

Although semi-decentralized planning substantially reduces synchronization relative to the centralized baseline, communication opportunities remain constrained by ground-station availability and operational considerations. This raises the question of whether every synchronization opportunity contributes equally to coordinated planning performance. To investigate this, two representative conjunction scenarios are ex-amined using the greedy synchronization schedule reduction procedure described in Algorithm 1. Beginning with the complete ground-station-derived synchronization schedule, synchronization events are iteratively removed while maintaining planning performance within a specified tolerance of the centralized solution. Rather than statistically characterizing the entire conjunction suite, these case studies illustrate how the re-duction procedure identifies the communication opportunities that contribute most to coordinated decision making. Figure 8 presents the reduction process for a representative head-on conjunction. The initial synchro-nization schedule contains all communication opportunities generated from the ground-station network, af-ter which synchronization events are progressively removed while preserving near-centralized performance. Several synchronization opportunities occurring well before maneuver execution are eliminated without mea-surable degradation in expected return. As the schedule becomes increasingly sparse, synchronization events immediately surrounding the maneuver are consistently retained, indicating that these communication oppor-tunities contribute disproportionately to coordinated planning performance. A similar trend is observed for the oblique conjunction shown in Figure 9. Despite the different conjunction geometry and contact schedule, early synchronization opportunities are again preferentially removed while communication events near maneuver execution remain essential for maintaining solution quality. Together, these representative case studies suggest that synchronization timing, rather than synchronization frequency 16 2345678910 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24                                                   

> Hours before TCA
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> 8
> 9
> 10
> 11
> 12
> 13
> 14
> 15
> 16
> 17
> 18
> 19
> 20
> 21
> 22
> 23
> 24
> 25
> Stage position, true elapsed time (T-24h to TCA)
> fixed marker width; only spacing/position is meaningful
> GS contacts (all) (nc=18)
> Window (near-burn, C9) -- accepted (nc=9)
> Attempt: drop C14 -- accepted (nc=8)
> Attempt: drop C15 -- accepted (nc=7)
> Attempt: drop C16 -- accepted (nc=6)
> Attempt: drop C17 -- accepted (nc=5)
> Attempt: drop C18 -- rejected (nc=4)
> Attempt: drop C19 -- rejected (nc=4)
> Attempt: drop C20 -- accepted (nc=4)
> Attempt: drop C18 -- rejected (nc=3)
> Attempt: drop C19 -- rejected (nc=3)
> Attempt: drop C21 -- accepted (nc=3)
> Attempt: drop C18 -- rejected (nc=2)
> Attempt: drop C19 -- rejected (nc=2)
> Attempt: drop C22 -- accepted (nc=2)
> Attempt: drop C18 -- rejected (nc=1)
> Attempt: drop C19 -- rejected (nc=1)
> Minimal (nc=2)
> Decentralized policy (no syncs) (nc=0)

Kept sync contacts  

> 1.5 0.0
> Delta return
> vs. centralized
> +0.00
> +0.00
> +0.00
> +0.00
> +0.00
> -1.16
> -0.03
> +0.00
> -1.99
> -0.04
> +0.00
> -1.16
> -0.03
> +0.00
> -1.16
> -0.33
> +0.00
> -1.16
> Maneuver hatch opacity is proportional to the fraction of rollouts that burn at that stage (faint = rare, solid = near-certain).

Greedy contact peel-down: Head on     

> Sync contact SC1 maneuver SC2 maneuver Centralized policy rail Decentralized policy rail

Figure 8. Greedy synchronization-schedule reduction for a representative head-on conjunction. Each row is one evaluated contact subset, with blue cells marking re-tained synchronization stages. Intermediate rows include both accepted and rejected single-contact removals; the right panel shows the resulting return relative to the cen-tralized solution. Maneuver hatching denotes SC1 and SC2 burn activity, with opacity proportional to maneuver frequency across Monte Carlo rollouts. The bold Minimal row is the locally minimal schedule returned by the greedy search. 

alone, governs the value of communication during collision avoidance planning, with opportunities surround-ing maneuver execution contributing most to coordinated decision making. 

CONCLUSIONS 

This work presented a semi-decentralized planning framework for autonomous multi-spacecraft collision avoidance under realistic communication constraints. By deriving synchronization opportunities directly from predicted ground-station visibility windows, the proposed SDec-POMDP formulation explicitly models the asynchronous information exchange that characterizes current conjunction assessment operations, bridg-ing the gap between idealized centralized planning and fully decentralized decision-making. The resulting planning problem is solved using approximate RS-SDA*, enabling coordinated maneuver planning under intermittent communication. Across a representative suite of simulated conjunction scenarios, semi-decentralized planning consistently recovered near-centralized performance while requiring 28.5% fewer synchronization events than continu-ous coordination. Further analysis demonstrated that communication opportunities surrounding maneuver execution contribute disproportionately to planning performance, indicating that synchronization timing is more important than synchronization frequency alone. Comparisons against representative rule-based oper-ator heuristics further showed that communication-aware optimization not only maintains collision safety, but also produces maneuver strategies that more consistently satisfy operational mission objectives by avoid-17 2345678910 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24                                    

> Hours before TCA
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> 8
> 9
> 10
> 11
> 12
> 13
> 14
> 15
> 16
> 17
> 18
> 19
> 20
> 21
> 22
> Stage position, true elapsed time (T-24h to TCA)
> fixed marker width; only spacing/position is meaningful
> GS contacts (all) (nc=16)
> Window (near-burn, C8) -- accepted (nc=8)
> Attempt: drop C14 -- accepted (nc=7)
> Attempt: drop C15 -- accepted (nc=6)
> Attempt: drop C16 -- accepted (nc=5)
> Attempt: drop C17 -- accepted (nc=4)
> Attempt: drop C18 -- rejected (nc=3)
> Attempt: drop C19 -- accepted (nc=3)
> Attempt: drop C18 -- rejected (nc=2)
> Attempt: drop C20 -- accepted (nc=2)
> Attempt: drop C18 -- rejected (nc=1)
> Attempt: drop C22 -- accepted (nc=1)
> Minimal (nc=1)
> Decentralized policy (no syncs) (nc=0)

Kept sync contacts  

> 10
> Delta return
> vs. centralized
> +0.00
> +0.00
> +0.00
> +0.00
> +0.00
> -0.41
> +0.00
> -1.28
> +0.00
> -1.28
> +0.00
> +0.00
> -1.28
> Maneuver hatch opacity is proportional to the fraction of rollouts that burn at that stage (faint = rare, solid = near-certain).

Greedy contact peel-down: Oblique     

> Sync contact SC1 maneuver SC2 maneuver Centralized policy rail Decentralized policy rail

Figure 9. Greedy synchronization-schedule reduction for a representative oblique conjunction. Figure conventions follow Figure 8. Despite the different encounter ge-ometry and contact schedule, the reduced solution again preserves synchronization near the dominant maneuver region while removing many earlier contacts. 

ing unnecessary trajectory deviation and over-conservative collision avoidance. Future work will extend the framework to model ground-segment communication delays more explicitly and incorporate covariance-based probability-of-collision metrics alongside propagated miss distance. More broadly, these results suggest a layered operational paradigm for autonomous conjunction assess-ment. In practice, conjunction assessment begins with a shared Conjunction Data Message (CDM), after which operators independently generate maneuver plans and receive updated spacecraft information as ad-ditional ground-station contacts become available. Under this workflow, an initial decentralized avoidance policy can provide a conservative safety baseline, while intermittent synchronization progressively refines maneuver decisions using updated state estimates and execution information. Rather than requiring con-tinuous coordination, communication becomes an opportunity to improve maneuver quality whenever new information is available. By explicitly incorporating this communication structure into the planning process, the proposed semi-decentralized framework bridges the gap between idealized centralized planning assump-tions and the operational realities of multi-operator collision avoidance, providing a practical foundation for future autonomous space traffic coordination. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This research was supported by the Fannie and John Hertz Foundation and the National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate (NDSEG) Fellowship Program. Specifically, this material is based upon work supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number FA9550-25-C-B010 in the amount of currently negotiated tuition and stipend rates. 18 REFERENCES 

[1] D. B. Spencer, M. E. Sorge, and M. A. Skinner, “Establishing “Norms of Behavior” for Satellite Col-lision Avoidance Maneuver Planning,” Journal of Space Safety Engineering , Vol. 11, No. 1, 2024, pp. 120–126, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsse.2023.11.012. [2] J. C. McDowell, “General Catalog of Artificial Space Objects,” https://planet4589.org , 2026. Accessed: 2026-07-09. [3] C. Ramos, D. McKissock, N. Herzer, K. Eppich, B. Bourque, J. Parris, and A. Alexander, “Lessons Learned on Mega-Constellation Deployments and Impact on Space Domain Awareness,” Advanced Maui Optical and Space Surveillance Technologies (AMOS) Conference , 2023. [4] Amazon Kuiper Commercial Services LLC, “Amazon Leo Status Report,” tech. rep., Federal Commu-nications Commission. Semi-annual constellation status report. [5] SpaceX, “Gen 1 and 2 Status Report,” tech. rep., Federal Communications Commission. Semi-annual constellation status report covering June 1, 2025 to May 31, 2026. [6] M. Sorge, T. Harris, C. Colombo, M. Hejduk, N. Fitz-Coy, R. Sheppard, E. Kerr, U. Das-gupta, N. Berend, D. Escobar, M. Michel, and C. Perez, “Space Traffic Management: Improve-ments to Spacecraft Collision Avoidance (COLA),” Acta Astronautica , Vol. 229, 2025, pp. 600–605, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2025.01.042. [7] J. L. Gonzalo, C. Colombo, and P. Di Lizia, “Analytical Framework for Space Debris Collision Avoid-ance Maneuver Design,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics , Vol. 44, No. 3, 2021, pp. 469– 487, 10.2514/1.G005398. [8] V. Braun, T. Flohrer, H. Krag, K. Merz, S. Lemmens, B. Virgili, and Q. Funke, “Operational Support to Collision Avoidance Activities by ESA’s Space Debris Office,” CEAS Space Journal , Vol. 8, 05 2016, 10.1007/s12567-016-0119-3. [9] J. L. Gonzalo, C. Colombo, and P. Di Lizia, “Introducing MISS, a New Tool for Collision Avoidance Analysis and Design,” Journal of Space Safety Engineering , Vol. 7, No. 3, 2020, pp. 282–289. Space Debris: The State of Art, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsse.2020.07.010. [10] J. L. Gonzalo and C. Colombo, “On-Board Collision Avoidance Applications Based on Machine Learn-ing and Analytical Methods,” European Conference on Space Debris , Darmstadt, Germany (virtual), 2021. ESA Space Debris Office. [11] W. Kuhl, J. Wang, D. Eddy, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Markov Decision Processes for Satel-lite Maneuver Planning and Collision Avoidance,” IEEE Aerospace Conference , 2025, pp. 1–9, 10.1109/AERO63441.2025.11068672. [12] L. Luna, J. Ortiz Couder, and R. Alejandro Vargas-Acosta, “Satellite Trajectory Optimization via Prox-imal Policy Optimization for Space Debris Avoidance,” IEEE Access , Vol. 14, 2026, pp. 18138–18154, 10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3655237. [13] A. Harris, T. Teil, and H. Schaub, “Spacecraft Decision-Making Autonomy using Deep Reinforcement Learning,” 29th AAS/AIAA space flight mechanics meeting , 2019, pp. 1–19. [14] G. Choumos, K. Tsaprailis, V. Lappas, and C. Kontoes, “Artificial Intelligence for a Safe Space: Data and Model Development Trends in Orbit Prediction and Collision Avoidance,” AIAA SciTech 2024 Fo-rum , 2024, p. 2066. [15] S. Dolan, V. Qin, G. Ding, and H. Balakrishnan, “Satellite Collision Avoidance Using Game-Theoretic Frameworks,” AAS/AIAA Astrodynamics Specialist Conference , 2023. [16] E. P. Blasch, K. Pham, and D. Shen, “Orbital Satellite Pursuit-Evasion Game-Theoretical Control,” 

International Conference on Information Science, Signal Processing and their Applications (ISSPA) ,2012, pp. 1007–1012, 10.1109/ISSPA.2012.6310436. [17] Y. Wang, S. Chang, H. Tang, and C. Wang, “Automating Satellite Collision Avoidance via Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning,” International Conference on Computer Information and Big Data Applica-tions , Association for Computing Machinery, 2025, p. 1284–1290, 10.1145/3746709.3746927. [18] D. Eddy, M. Ho, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Optimal Ground Station Selection for Low-Earth Orbiting Satellites,” IEEE Aerospace Conference , 2025, pp. 1–13, 10.1109/AERO63441.2025.11068558. [19] G. R. Kim, D. Eddy, V. Srinivas, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Scalable Ground Station Selection for Large LEO Constellations,” IEEE Aerospace Conference , 2026, pp. 1–13, 10.1109/AERO66936.2026.11519930. [20] M. Al-Husseini, K. H. Wray, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “A Semi-Decentralized Approach to Multiagent Control,” International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , 2026. [21] M. Al-Husseini, K. H. Wray, I. R. Ward, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Approximate heuristic search for semi-decentralized systems,” IJCAI , 2026. [22] NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Conjunction Assessment and Collision Avoidance for Space Environment Protection,” tech. rep., NASA, 2021. 19 [23] P. Chandramukhi, Debris Collision Avoidance Maneuver Optimization (CAMO) for Satellite Constella-tions . PhD thesis, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA, Dec. 2025. [24] J. W. Sales, “Trajectory Optimization for Spacecraft Collision Avoidance,” Tech. Rep. ADA583484, Defense Technical Information Center, Fort Belvoir, VA, USA, 2013. DTIC report ADA583484. [25] D. Eddy and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Brahe: A Modern Astrodynamics Library for Research and Engi-neering Applications,” 2026. 

APPENDIX A: REDUCED STATE-SPACE VALIDATION 

The reduced planning state defined in Equation (4) and Equation (5) treats the perpendicular standoff p⊥

as a scenario-specific constant and represents the terminal miss using Equation (3). The following validation examines the two assumptions underlying this reduction: that along-track control has negligible authority over p⊥, and that the resulting frozen-p⊥ representation reproduces the full three-dimensional miss at TCA. 

Approximation A: control has negligible authority over p⊥. For each of the 52 conjunction geometries in the evaluation suite, a 0.5 m /s along-track impulse of either sign was applied at each decision epoch and the resulting trajectory was propagated to TCA using the full six-dimensional Brahe model. As shown on the left of Figure 10, the impulse changes |δp T | by roughly 10 –130 km , while the induced change in p⊥ stays at the kilometer scale or below across every geometry and burn time. The available control therefore acts almost entirely along the retained state dimension; the residual perpendicular response is a higher-order effect, small relative to both the maneuver-induced along-track displacement and the state-discretization scale, so planning remains effective even with p⊥ held fixed per conjunction. 

Approximation B: the frozen-p⊥ miss reproduces the true miss at TCA. The ballistic reduced miss was evaluated for the same 52 conjunctions used throughout the paper by combining the discretized δp T with 

p⊥ frozen at the encounter start. Independently, each conjunction was propagated in the full six-dimensional Brahe environment and its true three-dimensional miss was evaluated at TCA. Across true misses of 0.07 –

11 .4 km , the right of Figure 10 lies on the y = x line, including near the 1 km collision boundary. The residual mred − m3D has mean +0 .017 km , mean absolute value 0.020 km , and maximum absolute value 

0.055 km ; all 52 cases agree within ±1 km . This comparison is explicitly ballistic and at TCA: it isolates the fidelity of the state representation from the separate maneuver-transition approximation. Across the paper’s complete conjunction suite, the reduced state therefore preserves the terminal miss quantity used for decision making to well below the discretization scale. 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0         

> Time to TCA at burn (days)
> 10 −3
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> Absolute change in miss component at TCA, from one 0.5 m/s burn (km)
> |∆δp T|(along-track)
> |∆p⊥|(perpendicular) 1 km collision threshold 10 010 1
> True 3-D miss at TCA, from brahe (km)
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Reduced miss  √δp 2
> T + p2
> ⊥ (km)
> y=x(exact match) 1 km collision line 52 paper conjunctions

Figure 10. Validation of the reduced conjunction-state representation. Left: a 0.5 m /s

along-track impulse changes δp T by tens of kilometers, while the induced change in 

p⊥ = pp2 

> R

+ p2 

> N

stays near the kilometer scale, arising only through higher-order coupling. Right: under ballistic propagation, the reduced miss m = pδp 2 

> T

+ p2 

> ⊥

with frozen p⊥ reproduces the full three-dimensional Brahe miss at TCA across the 52-conjunction evaluation set, including near the 1 km collision boundary. 

20 APPENDIX B: OPERATOR-HEURISTIC BASELINES 

The operator-heuristic baselines in Table 2 outline various fixed, independent decision rules applied sep-arately by each spacecraft. No heuristic constructs a coordinated joint maneuver plan. Each spacecraft maintains a continuous Gaussian estimate of its along-track miss and may execute an along-track avoidance burn followed by a return-to-nominal counter-burn (each 0.5 m /s). When a maneuver is selected, its direction and timing are chosen to target the center of the desired 4–7 km miss-distance band, mtgt = 5 .5 km .

Table 2. Independent operator-heuristic baselines used for comparison. 

Family Rule and trigger Purpose 

Threshold Burn when the believed miss falls below 5 km or 2 km . Execu-tion is deferred to the latest stage from which one burn can reach 

mtgt ; threshold 0 denotes a nonmaneuvering spacecraft. Reactive go/no-go control. Selfish Each spacecraft independently selects the latest burn predicted to place its own terminal miss near mtgt , using a blind, cautious, or observation-aware model of the other spacecraft. Smart but uncoordinated control. Fixed-lead Execute one burn at T − 7 h regardless of belief, then return toward the nominal trajectory. Schedule- versus belief-based timing. 

21