Title: Coverage First Next Best View for Inspection of Cluttered Pipe Networks Using Mobile Manipulators

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.16471v1

Published Time: Wed, 18 Mar 2026 01:11:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Coverage First Next Best View for Inspection of Cluttered Pipe Networks Using Mobile Manipulators 

Joshua R. Bettles, 1 Jiaxu Wu, 2 Bruno Vilhena Adorno, 1 Joaquin Carrasco, 1 and Atsushi Yamashita 2

Abstract вҖ” Robotic inspection of radioactive areas enables op-erators to be removed from hazardous environments; however, planning and operating in confined, cluttered environments remain challenging. These systems must autonomously recon-struct the unknown environment and cover its surfaces, whilst estimating and avoiding collisions with objects in the environ-ment. In this paper, we propose a new planning approach based on next-best-view that enables simultaneous exploration and exploitation of the environment by reformulating the coverage path planning problem in terms of information gain. To handle obstacle avoidance under uncertainty, we extend the vector-field-inequalities framework to explicitly account for stochastic measurements of geometric primitives in the environment via chance constraints in a constrained optimal control law. The stochastic constraints were evaluated experimentally alongside the planner on a mobile manipulator in a confined environment to inspect a pipe network. These experiments demonstrate that the system can autonomously plan and execute inspection and coverage paths to reconstruct and fully cover the simplified pipe network. Moreover, the system successfully estimated geometric primitives online and avoided collisions during motion between viewpoints. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Pipe networks are ubiquitous across industries and partic-ularly prevalent in the nuclear sector. Many nuclear power plants (NPPs) use pipes to transport effluent and steam across the site, and these networks require routine monitoring and inspection for damage and degradation. These pipe networks are located in radiological areas of NPPs, posing an additional health risk to workers who inspect them. These spaces are often confined and cluttered, making them difficult to monitor [1]. Following natural disasters and incidents, such as the Fukushima Daiichi NPP incident, facilities may be damaged and therefore remain in an unknown physical and radiological state. These spaces require extensive professional monitoring to collect the data necessary to formulate an appropriate, targeted decommissioning plan, which exposes the expert to harmful radiation. Moreover, these experts are not always trained or qualified to perform structural monitoring tasks,   

> This work was partially supported by the ARTERD project as part of the OECD NEA NEST fellowship program 2025 and JAEA Nuclear Energy S&T and Human Resource Development Project Grant Number JPJA24H24020026, EPSRC iCASE Project Grant Number EP/Y52864X/1, and by the Royal Academy of Engineering under the Research Chairs and Senior Research Fellowships programme.
> 1Joshua R. Bettles, Bruno Vilhena Adorno, and Joaquin Carrasco are with the Manchester Centre for Robotics and AI, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. Emails: joshua.bettles@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk and
> {bruno.adorno, joaquin.carrasco }@manchester.ac.uk.
> 2Jiaxu Wu and Atsushi Yamashita are with The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Emails: {wujiaxu, yamashita }@robot.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

necessitating secondary inspections, thereby increasing expo-sure to these hazardous environments. Mobile manipulators can navigate these confined spaces and collect data while mitigating the health and safety risks associated with the use of experts. The challenge is to generate inspection paths and control the mobile manipulator in these environments. 

A. Path Planning for Inspection Tasks 

Inspection of pipe networks can be categorised into two tasks: reconstruction and coverage. One approach for 3D volumetric reconstruction is next best view (NBV), which selects viewpoints to maximise the expected information gain (IG) of a sensor [2]. These approaches typically do not rely on prior knowledge of the environment and drive the system to explore the space. In [3], an RRT-based approach was used to generate and evaluate candidate branched paths within the environment. To address path generation in a computationally efficient way, a focal-point approach was utilised for a mobile manipulator to maintain focus on the object of interest when moving between viewpoints, rather than following branches [4]. A new approach to viewpoint generation was presented in [5], where viewpoints are generated within the configuration space of the mobile manipulator. The authors used a utility function to rank viewpoints based on collisions, overlap, discovery, and distance. A weighted sum of various IG metrics was introduced in [6], based on unknown and visited voxels and sensor measurements from a radiation probe, where radiation sensor readings were encoded into a map a posteriori. Coverage path planning (CPP) is similar to NBV; however, it aims to generate paths that completely cover a known surface with a specific sensor. Many of these approaches sample candidate points in the vicinity of the object to be inspected and solve the set coverage problem using sampling-based methods, which usually provide probabilistic guarantees of complete coverage [7]. They can use both mesh- and occupancy-map-based representations of the ob-ject and optimise the path via resampling [8]. In [9], the problem of exploring and covering local unknown areas was considered. It was shown that, for increased path length, these approaches yield greater surface coverage. In [10], an online global coverage and inspection planner was proposed that decomposes the space into sectors and inspects each region. The application in [6] employs two separate sensors to inform coverage and exploration; however, it utilises the radiation sensor to inform the selection of the viewpoints for improved reconstruction of the target, as opposed to using the sensor to achieve a secondary task such as surface coverage. 

> arXiv:2603.16471v1 [cs.RO] 17 Mar 2026

B. Collision Avoidance in Unknown Environments 

There are many approaches to collision avoidance in confined and cluttered environments, such as rapidly ex-ploring random trees (RRTs), probabilistic roadmap (PRMs), artificial potential fields (APFs) [11], and control barrier functions (CBFs) [12]. RRTs are exploration algorithms that navigate a space by generating a random tree that avoids collisions with obstacles in the environment [13]. PRMs generate a sampling-based roadmap that captures the connectivity of the free configuration space; however, they typically handle static workspaces and require preprocessing to generate the roadmap [13]. Also, since they are both planning approaches, they are used in addition to a controller. APFs are widely used in planning and control applications; however, they suffer from oscillations, local minima, and unreachable targets [11]. Conversely, CBFs enforce set in-variance on the controllerвҖҷs input, ensuring that the system remains within the safe set [12]. They have been applied across the control field for collision avoidance, most notably in adaptive cruise control [14], bipedal robotic walking [15], and manipulation [16]. Vector field inequalities (VFIs) [17] can be considered a special case of CBFs [12, remark 4]. The authors adopted a geometric approach to derive task-space collision-avoidance constraints that, by construction, generate the forward-invariant safe set О©S [17]. In [18], these were implemented alongside a whole-body kinematic controller for a holonomic mobile manipulator to avoid obstacles and maintain visibility of a moving object. VFIs have been extended to second-order systems in [19] and applied to self-collision avoidance between elements of the robotic system. In [20], an adaptive controller was derived to adapt system parameters online and account for kinematic inaccuracies in the model. In that work, VFIs were modified to enforce collision avoidance un-der the control input and adaptation signals in the estimated task space. Those controllers and constraints are formulated in con-tinuous time, assuming deterministic knowledge of the ge-ometric primitives within the environment; as such, they only provide formal safety guarantees when operating in continuous time with perfect knowledge of the constraints. Derwent et al. [21] addressed the discretisation error by buffering the constraints to ensure that system behaviour remained safe despite the discrete implementation of con-tinuous time formulations. The CBF field addresses this problem by redesigning the controller in discrete time using discrete-time Control Lyapunov Functions and discrete-time CBFs [22], [23]. Several works have extended CBFs to stochastic systems, with [24] formulating reciprocal and zero CBFs for continuous-time stochastic systems. Meanwhile, [25] investigated stochastic CBF under state estimation for systems that evolve on manifolds and demonstrated the approach for systems evolving in SE (2) and SE (3) . In [26], a probabilistic CBF framework for discrete-time stochastic systems was developed by reformulating the CBF as chance constraints. Chance constraints have also been widely used in stochastic model predictive control [27], with most research focusing on the effects of uncertainty and noise in the state variable. 

C. Statement of Contributions 

The contributions of this paper are twofold. Firstly, we propose a new planning scheme that enables simultaneous execution of coverage and inspection tasks using two in-dependent sensors rather than a single sensor as in current state-of-the-art approaches. Recasting the CPP problem as a coverage IG problem enables integration with current NBV approaches without loss of generality and facilitates its application to other tasks with differing sensor models and requirements. We apply this to radiation monitoring in an unknown environment with no prior radiological mea-surements, and to reconstructing surfaces within a confined space. Secondly, this paper introduces the concept of stochastic VFIs (SVFIs), which extends the current VFI framework to account for measurement uncertainty in obstacles. By introducing chance constraints into the constrained optimal motion controller, we account for uncertainty in the ge-ometric primitives, thereby providing collision avoidance with probabilistic guarantees. We transform these stochas-tic constraints via a deterministic surrogate, which can be easily included in the current constrained optimal controller formulations. Both approaches were experimentally validated on a non-holonomic mobile manipulator for the task of inspecting an unknown pipe network in a confined space to simulate a real-world environment. II. M ATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND 

A. Whole-Body Kinematic Control 

The task-space kinematics of a mobile manipulator can be described as 

x = h(q), (1) 

Лҷx = Ju , (2) where x вҲҲ Rm is the task-space vector, q вүң q(t) =[qT 

> base

qT

> arm

]T вҲҲ Rn is the stacked configuration vector of the robotвҖҷs base and arm, h : Rn вҶ’ Rm is a function that maps the configuration vector to the task-space vector, typically obtained through the forward kinematics, J вүң

J(q) вҲҲ RmГ—n is the task Jacobian matrix, and u is the control input given as configuration velocities (i.e., u вүң Лҷq). Let the task be described as x вүң [tTe nTe ]T , in which 

te, ne вҲҲ R3 is the translation and direction (i.e., rotation axis) of the end effector, respectively. The task Jacobian is given as J вүң [JTt JTn ]T , where Jt вүң Jt(q) is the translation Jacobian and Jn вүң Jn(q) is the line direction Jacobian that satisfies Лҷne = Jn Лҷq [17]. The desired whole-body control law is formulated as a constrained quadratic program (QP) [17] that enforces the task-space error to converge to zero exponentially as best as possible. It is given by 

u вҲҲ argmin 

> Лҷq

|| J Лҷq + ОәЛңx|| 22 + О»c || Лҷq|| 22 + О»s|| s|| 22

subject to W i Лҷq вӘҜ wi

W e Лҷq = we

W s Лҷq вҲ’ s вӘҜ ws

Pr( W c Лҷq вӘ° wc) вӘ° Оұc,

(3) where u is the control input expressed as configuration space velocities, Лңx = x вҲ’ xd is the task-space error with controller gain and damping given by Оә, О» c вҲҲ (0 , вҲһ), respectively. The set point is assumed to be constant such that Лҷxd = 0. The system is subject to a set of linear differential inequalities in the control inputs, in which W i and wi enforce task-space and configuration-space constraints through determin-istic VFIs. The nonholonomic constraint is enforced by W e

and we as an equality constraint on the QP using the method of [28]. The whole-body control law is the same as that in [4], which was used for a holonomic system. Specific deterministic VFIs with parameters given by W s and ws

are relaxed through the use of the slack vector s to ensure feasibility [21], which is penalised by О»s вҲҲ (0 , вҲһ). We propose additional chance constraints to ensure that the VFIs with parameters given by W c and wc, related to uncertain geometric primitives, will be respected with a probability of at least Оұc.

B. Vector Field Inequalities 

VFIs are a geometrical approach to CBF that enables the transformation of nonlinear constraints in the robot configuration into linear differential inequalities in the robot configuration. They are particularly useful to enforce col-lision avoidance between two geometric primitives, where one or more are kinematically coupled to the robot. They leverage the signed distance between the primitives and the distance Jacobian that relates the time derivative of the distance to the robotвҖҷs configuration velocities. For dynamic objects, it is important to determine the residual, the motion of the entities that is independent of robot configuration velocities. In this present work, however, only static objects are being considered. The reader is directed to [17] for the derivation of the constraints, residuals, and implementation. For completeness, the essentials are summarised herein. VFIs can be used to enforce two behaviours, staying within a safe zone or outside of a restricted zone with a (constant) minimum safety distance dsafe вҲҲ [0 , вҲһ). The distance to the boundary is given by Лңd вүң Лңd(q) = d вҲ’ dsafe , where d вүң d(q)

is the distance between two primitives in the task-space, with one being kinematically coupled to the robot. The restricted zone О©R and the safe zone О©S given as 

О©R вүң

n

q вҲҲ Rn : Лңd(q) < 0

o

,

О©S вүң

n

q вҲҲ Rn : Лңd(q) вүҘ 0

o

.

The signed distance dynamics can be expressed as 

ЛҷЛңd = Лҷd вҲ’ Лҷdsafe = Лҷd, (4) where a positive ЛҷЛңd means the robot is moving away from the boundary, whereas a negative ЛҷЛңd means the robot is approaching the boundary. These dynamics are constrained by ЛҷЛңd вүҘ вҲ’ О· Лңd вҮҗвҮ’ вҲ’ Jd Лҷq вүӨ О· Лңd, (5) where Jd вҲҲ R1Г—n is the distance Jacobian relating the primitive attached to the robot to the workspace primitive, and О· вҲҲ [0 , вҲһ) is the maximum allowable approach rate to the boundary. III. S TOCHASTIC VECTOR FIELD INEQUALITIES FOR 

PLANES 

We introduce SVFIs in (3) to account for measurement uncertainty by exploiting chance constraints. We consider only the uncertainty associated with estimating geometric primitives in the environment. Since the geometrical parame-ters of these primitives are not known exactly, the associated covariances must be accounted for in the controller to prevent collisions with a prescribed probability. A chance constraint imposes a probability that a constraint is satisfied and allows the inclusion of uncertainties within the formulation. The general form is given by 

Pr ( Ax вӘ° b) вүҘ Оұ, (6) where Оұ вҲҲ (0 , 1) is the probability that the constraint is satisfied, Rn вҲӢ x вҲј N (Ојx, ОЈx), Rm вҲӢ b вҲј N (Ојb, ОЈb) and 

RmГ—n вҲӢ A вҲј N (ОјA, ОЈA). We use (5) in (6) to obtain 

Pr 

 ЛҷЛңd вүҘ вҲ’ О· Лңd



вүҘ Оұ вҮҗвҮ’ Pr 



Jd Лҷq вүҘ вҲ’ О· Лңd



вүҘ Оұ. (7) Let a static plane be given by ПҖ = [ nTПҖ dПҖ ]T , where 

nПҖ вҲҲ R3 is the normal of the plane, and dПҖ вҲҲ R is the signed perpendicular distance between the plane and the origin of the reference frame. The estimation of the true plane is given by ЛҶПҖ вҲј N (ПҖ, ОЈПҖ ), with ЛҶПҖ = [ ЛҶ nTПҖ ЛҶdПҖ ]T , and 

ОЈПҖ вҲҲ R4Г—4 being the covariance matrix associated with the plane estimation. Given an arbitrary point t вүң t(q) attached to the robot, with Лҷt = Jt Лҷq, the point-to-plane distance with respect to ПҖ is given by 

dПҖt,ПҖ = вҹЁnПҖ , tвҹ© вҲ’ dПҖ . (8) The desired distance dynamics, enforced through the use of VFIs [17], is expressed as 

ЛҷdПҖt,ПҖ вүҘ вҲ’ О· ЛңdПҖt,ПҖ вҮҗвҮ’ nTПҖ Jt Лҷq вүҘ вҲ’ О·(dПҖt,ПҖ вҲ’ dsafe ), (9) which implies nTПҖ Jt Лҷq + О·d ПҖt,ПҖ вүҘ О·d safe . By substituting (8) into the VFI (9), we obtain 

nTПҖ (Jt Лҷq + О·t) вҲ’ О·d ПҖ вүҘ О·d safe . (10) By defining 

f (ПҖ) вүң nTПҖ (Jt Лҷq + О·t) вҲ’ О·d ПҖ =  ЛҷqT JTt +О·tT вҲ’О· ПҖ

(11) as a linear function of the plane parameters and substituting it into (7), we get 

Pr ( f (ПҖ) вүҘ О·d safe ) вүҘ Оұ, (12) which expresses that the VFI will be respected with prob-ability at least Оұ. Assuming that the estimated plane pa-rameters follow a Gaussian distribution, we can express the function (11) in terms of the estimated plane as f ( ЛҶ ПҖ) вҲјN (f (ПҖ), Пғ 2 

> f(ПҖ)

). The covariance of f (ПҖ) is propagated through the linear transformation [29] given by 

Пғ2  

> f(ПҖ)

= вҲҮf (ПҖ)T ОЈПҖ вҲҮf (ПҖ) , (13) where 

вҲҮf (ПҖ) = 

пЈ®пЈ° вҲӮf (ПҖ)

> вҲӮnПҖ

TвҲӮf (ПҖ)

> вҲӮd ПҖ

пЈ№пЈ» =

Jt Лҷq + О·t

вҲ’О·



. (14) We define Z вүң f (ПҖ)вҲ’f (ЛҶПҖ)  

> Пғf(ПҖ)

вҲј N (0 , 1) and use (13) to rewrite (12) as 

Pr 



Z вүҘ О·d safe вҲ’ f (ЛҶПҖ)

Пғf (ПҖ)



= 1 вҲ’ ОҰ

 О·d safe вҲ’ f (ЛҶПҖ)

Пғf (ПҖ)



вүҘ Оұ, 

(15) where ОҰ is the standard Gaussian cumulative density func-tion [30]. This allows us to use the inverse cumulative distribution function, ОҰвҲ’1, on (15). Noting that ОҰ( вҲ’x) = 1вҲ’ОҰ( x) and that ОҰ is a monotonically increasing continuous function, we obtain 

ОҰ

f (ЛҶПҖ)вҲ’О·d safe 

Пғf (ПҖ)



вүҘ Оұ вҮҗвҮ’ О·d safe вҲ’f (ЛҶПҖ) вүӨ вҲ’ ОҰвҲ’1(Оұ)Пғf (ПҖ).

The final deterministic surrogate of the SVFI is given as 

вҲ’ ЛҶnTПҖ Jt

| {z }  

> JЛҶПҖ

Лҷq вүӨ О·( ЛҶ nTПҖ t вҲ’ ЛҶdПҖ

| {z }

> dЛҶПҖ

вҲ’dsafe ) вҲ’ bОұ, (16) where bОұ = ОҰвҲ’1(Оұ)Пғf (ПҖ), J ЛҶПҖ is the expected-point-to-plane distance Jacobian, and dЛҶПҖ is the expected-point-to-plane distance. The term bОұ in (16) serves to buffer the point-to-plane VFI based on the covariance of the geometric parameters of the measured plane and the chosen probability of respecting the VFI, thereby giving the buffer value a probabilistic meaning, whilst being generalisable to other geometric primitives. The constraint (16) is nonlinear in the control inputs ( Лҷq) since the covariance depends on joint velocities. In practical discrete implementations based on zero-order hold, the configuration velocities calculated in the latest sampling period can be used in the calculation of the covariance of the planeвҖҷs geometric parameters. However, this will affect the buffer size, especially during acceleration towards the buffer. Since |bОұ| вҲқ вҲҘ ЛҷqвҲҘ, if the configuration velocity vector norm from the previous sampling period used to calculate the buffer is smaller than the actual velocity in the current sampling period, the buffer size might be underestimated (overly confident estimate). This may result in a violation of the inflated buffer and, consequently, the VFI might not be respected with the prescribed probability. Conversely, if the configuration velocity vector is larger in the previous sampling period than in the actual sampling period, the buffer will be overestimated due to an overly conservative estimate. Nonetheless, those issues are unlikely to have any practical effect for sufficiently small sampling periods. IV. C OVERAGE FIRST NEXT BEST VIEW 

To plan multiple tasks simultaneously, such as 3D recon-struction and surface coverage, we present our coverage first next best view (CFNBV) planner. It reformulates each task using IG and a linearly weighted sum, which is then applied to two independent sensors. This approach is generalisable to any number of tasks or sensors, provided that an appropriate sensor model and an IG metric are specified. The IG in CFNBV is defined as the amount of information each candidate viewpoint provides about the environment per task. The concept of volumetric information (VI) is defined in [2], which uses a voxelised representation of the environment to quantify the IG based on voxel occupancy. We use the VI framework to define visual IG and entropy, and apply these concepts to CPP as coverage IG and entropy. Let us consider the bounded voxelised robot workspace 

W = SNОҪ 

> i=1

ОҪi, where ОҪi вҠӮ R3 is the ith voxel and NОҪ

is the total number of voxels, containing unknown surfaces such as pipes, discretised and represented as an OctoMap [31]. Initially, the workspace is unknown, and the goal of the visual portion (3D reconstruction) of the algorithm is to categorise each voxel such that W = Wunk вҲӘ W free вҲӘ W occ вҲӘWres , where Wunk is the set of unknown voxels, Wfree is the set of unoccupied voxels, Wocc is the set of occupied voxels, and Wres is the set of residual voxels. A residual voxel is one where there exists no valid viewpoint from which to observe it; this occurs for voxels inside or obstructed by objects. The goal is to then drive the system to achieve Wunk = вҲ…, where the equality becomes W \ W res = Wfree вҲӘ W occ . Conversely, the goal of the coverage portion of the algorithm is to achieve 

Wcov = Wocc , where Wcov is the set of covered voxels, by categorising each voxel based on a secondary sensor. The task is considered complete only when both conditions are satisfied. 

A. Visual Information Gain 

The rear side entropy from [2] is used to define visual IG. For a given candidate viewpoint in V вҲӢ v = [ tTc nTc ]T ,where tc, nc вҲҲ R3 are the candidate voxel position and randomly generated direction, respectively, and a visual sensor model, let Rv (v) denote the set of random rays cast from the viewpoint within the sensor model. We thus define the expected IG from the candidate voxel viewpoint Gv (v)

to be 

Gv (v) = X 

> rвҲҲR v(v)

IRv (r), with IRv (r) = X

> ОҪвҲҲW v

Iv (ОҪ), (17) where IRv (r) is the IG for each ray r and Iv (ОҪ) is the VI for each voxel ОҪ вҲҲ W v вҠҶ W that the ray r passes through until it reaches a surface or the maximum sensor range. The VI of ОҪ is given by the entropy of the voxel, defined as 

Io(ОҪ) = вҲ’ Pr( ОҪ) ln (Pr( ОҪ)) вҲ’ Pr( ОҪ) ln (Pr( ОҪ)) , (18) where Pr( ОҪ) = (1 вҲ’ Pr( ОҪ)) and Pr( ОҪ) is the probability that the voxel ОҪ is occupied. We can also define a binary function based on the observed state of each voxel as 

Ip(ОҪ) = 

(

1, if ОҪ is unknown ,

0, if ОҪ is known , (19) such that combining (18) and (19) gives the expression 

Iv (ОҪ) = Ip(ОҪ)Io(ОҪ), (20) where the IG is only for unobserved voxels. 

B. Coverage Information gain 

Since we are only interested in occupied voxels when considering the coverage task, we cannot use the same definitions as for the visual VI gain to define the coverage VI gain. Given a different sensor model, such as a sphere representing a radiation probe that is to cover a surface, define Ro(v) as the set of rays cast from v within the coverage sensor model. Let us also consider a new state for each voxel as вҖңcoveredвҖқ, which denotes whether a voxel has been covered or observed by this secondary sensor. The coverage IG, Gc(v), is given as 

Gc(v) = X

> rвҲҲR o(v)

IRo (r), with IRo (r) = X

> ОҪвҲҲW o

Ic(ОҪ), (21) where IRo (r) is the IG for each ray r and Ic(ОҪ) is the VI for each voxel ОҪ вҲҲ W o вҠҶ W that the ray r passes through until it reaches a surface or the maximum sensor range. Let us define the coverage VI, Ic(ОҪ), for each voxel as a binary function based on the covered and occupied states as 

Ic(ОҪ) = 

(

ln(0 .5) , if ОҪ is occupied and not covered ,

0, if ОҪ is unoccupied, unknown, or covered .

(22) 

C. Weighted Information Gain 

The two IGs are combined via a weighted linear sum, with weights determined by the task priority; any number of tasks may be considered. For our application, the coverage and visual IG are combined as 

Gw(v) = ОІGv (v) + (1 вҲ’ ОІ)Gc(v) (23) where ОІ вҲҲ [0 , 1] is the task priority and can be altered in favour of specific tasks. 

D. Sampling and Selection 

Uniform random sampling is used to generate the set of candidate viewpoints at each planning step. Suppose we have a function Uniform : 2 W вҶ’ R3 Г— R3 that generates a random candidate viewpoint from a set of free voxels, where 2W is the power set of W. We define the set VN ,containing N samples, such that VN = {vi вҲҲ R3 Г— R3 :

vi = Uniform( Wfree ), i = 1 , . . . , N }. To find the optimal candidate viewpoint at each planning step, it suffices to solve 

xd вҲҲ argmax 

> vвҲҲV

Gw(v), (24) where xd becomes the controllerвҖҷs new set point. The process repeats once the set point is reached, the error norm of the closed-loop system formed of (1) and (2) under control law (3) reaches a local minimum, or the stopping criterion is met. TABLE I: Experimental Parameters                                

> Parameter Value Sensor Configuration
> RGB-D field of view (FoV) (60 в—Ұ,45 в—Ұ)
> RGB-D maximum range 3 m
> Radiation sensor radius 0.4 m
> Controller Parameters
> (Оұ, Оә, О» c)(0 .7,6,1.2) (О»s, О· )(5 В·10 3,1)
> Point-to-plane dsafe (arm, base) (0 .1,0.5) m
> Point-to-line dsafe 0.075 m
> Frequency 100 Hz
> Planning Parameters
> No. of rays in Ro,Rv200
> N500
> Octomap resolution 0.05 m
> Stopping criterion IG <1
> Error norm criterion || Лңx|| 2<0.001
> ОІ0.75

V. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP 

The system comprises a UF7 manipulator and an Ag-ileX Tracer nonholonomic mobile platform with an onboard power distribution system and a wireless router. An on-board computer with AMD Ryzen 7 8-core CPU running at 3.8 GHz and 32 GB of RAM was used, running Ubuntu 22.04 and ROS 2 Humble. The drivers for each robot and the whole-body controller were implemented using the SmartArmStack [32] and the DQ Robotics library [33], respectively. Localisation was handled via FAST-LIO [34], and the map was stored as an OctoMap [31] for planning. Geometric primitives were extracted using RANSAC from the point cloud library [35]. An external laptop with an Intel Core i7 8-core CPU running at 3.8 GHz and 16 GB of RAM running Ubuntu 22.04 was connected to the robot via Wi-Fi and used to visualise the output and execute the CFNBV planner to generate inspection points. An Intel RealSense D455 was used to capture visual data for updating the OctoMap of the environment. The experiment was confined to a 1.5 m cube with an arbitrary configuration of one to three pipes. Self-collision avoidance was implemented to ensure that the sensors did not collide with the arm or base [19]. A slack variable was used for the joint velocity and point-to-line constraints [17] to prevent the control problem from becoming infeasible by allowing minor violations to compensate for noisy mea-surements and the line estimatorвҖҷs poor performance. The experimental parameters of the system are given in Table I. A depth sensor model was used to estimate visual IG, as shown in Fig. 1, and a radiation sensor model was used to estimate coverage IG. Fig. 1: The experimental setup with the constructed mobile manipulator in a single-pipe environment, overlaid with the radiation sensor model represented as a sphere in red, centred on Fsensor , and the depth sensor model represented by the camerasвҖҷ FoV in pink. Several experimental limitations include the absence of a radiation sensor. Thus, a spherical sensor model was used, with random data generated to represent background radiation sensor readings. Since the planner does not use the radiation sensor measurements and only considers the sensor model, the absence of an actual sensor does not affect its performance. The selected depth camera had a minimum distance requirement of 30 cm ; erroneous readings occurred when the system moved too close to a pipe. These erroneous readings occasionally caused the pipe estimator to fail, resulting in collisions between the robot and the pipe network. This could be mitigated by using a more appropriate depth sensor with a minimum distance better suited to the close interaction with the pipe required by the radiation sensor. VI. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 

A total of nine successful trials were conducted with the system in an unknown environment with varying pipe config-urations. This section focuses on the results from the three-pipe scenario, as it is the most challenging configuration tested. 

A. Controller 

The whole-body controller (3) was implemented, and the time response is shown in Fig. 2c for one of the trials with three pipes. The control input for the base, Fig. 2a, expressed in the base frame, shows Лҷy = 0 m/s for the duration of the trial, meaning the nonholonomic equality constraint was always satisfied, as expected. During all trials, the expected-point-to-plane constraints were satisfied for the mobile platform and the radiation probe, where the underlying distance constraint was main-tained even as the buffer suffered minor violations, as shown in Fig. 2d. All joint limits were respected throughout the experiments. Each spike in the task-space error was due to the controller selecting a new target, as shown in Fig. 2c, which occurred when the error norm remained unchanged for more than four seconds or fell below the threshold. At certain points during execution, the task-space error increased (at 175 and 

315 seconds in Fig. 2c). This was due to violations of the unbuffered, deterministic point-to-line constraints, which caused the system to increase the distance to the target to reach a safe state and navigate around the boundary. This caused the control input for the arm joint velocities to exceed the limit in order to force the system out of the restricted area, Fig. 2b. However, these are only minor violations and plateau due to the introduction of the slack variable and its heavy penalisation. 

B. CFNBV 

Five of the nine trials were within the three-pipe environ-ment, with the system starting at a location where no pipes were visible. The initial viewpoint selected maximises visual IG, as shown in Fig. 3c, resulting in an exponential decrease in the percentage of unknown voxels and average entropy within the first 20% of the task as the closed-loop system converges to the initial set point. During this time period, the number of both the free and occupied voxels increased as the pipes within the en-vironment were detected, shown in Fig. 3a. This resulted in an increase in the coverage entropy per voxel, as new information is introduced into the system, which can be seen in Fig. 3b. The mean combined entropy per voxel of the system is defined using (18) and (22) as S =

> 1
> |W|

P

> ОҪвҲҲW

 Io(ОҪ) + Ic(ОҪ), where |W| is the cardinality of W.This increase in entropy is reflected in the interplay between the visual and coverage IG: once a surface has been identified, the optimisation automatically switches from exploring the environment to exploiting the surface, balanc-ing coverage of uncovered voxels whilst choosing viewpoints that still generate visual information. This leads to a locally optimal selection of viewpoints at each planning iteration and to an approach that aims to minimise entropy and the information of the system. This approach is a probabilistic implementation of NBV due to the random generation of candidate viewpoints. The position was generated by selecting a voxel within Wfree 

according to a uniform distribution, whereas the viewpoint axis direction was generated by selecting pan and tilt angles from a uniform distribution in the intervals [вҲ’ПҖ, ПҖ ) and 

[вҲ’ ПҖ 

> 2

, ПҖ 

> 2

], respectively. Since each voxel in the OctoMap is represented by a probability of occupancy, these values approach but never reach the occupancy limits, and therefore, the visual entropy of the system will never decrease to zero. Conversely, since the coverage entropy is represented in a binary fashion, this will decrease to zero if all voxels are covered. (a) (b) (c)  

> (d) (e)

Fig. 2: Time response of the closed-loop system from one trial in the three-pipe environment: (a) control input for the base, (b) control input for the arm, (c) norm of the task-space error, (d) distance to planes, and (e) distance to pipe constraints for the mobile manipulator in the confined space. Horizontal red dashed lines represent limits for the associated variables, whereas vertical black dashed lines represent the selection of a new set point.   

> (a) (b) (c)

Fig. 3: Results of the CFNBV planner within the three-pipe environment with the mean value of the five trials displayed with the maximum and minimum values overlaid. (a) The evolution of the voxels and their categorisation based on the visual and coverage sensors, (b) the minimisation of the combined entropy per voxel, and (c) the interplay between the IGs for environment exploration and surface exploitation. The current system does not reclassify occupied and covered voxels if they later become unoccupied due to depth sensor noise, leading to misclassification. This resulted in a covered voxel percentage exceeding that of occupied voxels. We chose not to reassess the coverage of reclassified voxels, as it would potentially require unnecessary secondary coverage of these points. VII. C ONCLUSIONS 

This paper introduces a new planning method for inspect-ing and covering unknown surfaces in confined spaces. It reformulates the CPP problem as a coverage IG problem and integrates it with NBV approaches. By defining a suitable information-gain metric for the sensor and application, tasks can be combined into a single planning approach, rather than necessitating multiple planners. The performance of this approach was experimentally evaluated on a mobile manipulator in a confined environment, demonstrating the utility of simultaneous reconstruction and coverage. Moreover, the VFI framework was extended to account for measurement uncertainty in the geometric primitives. Estimating these primitives online removes the need for prior knowledge of the environment and for precise localisation with respect to the robot. By incorporating uncertainty, we provide a probability of collision avoidance for these estimated primitives and show that it is equivalent to adding a buffer to a surrogate deterministic constraint, which can be dynamically calculated online. The proposed method requires an estimator to extract the pose of each primitive; here, it is applied to a plane. However, generalising this to other primitives is the topic of ongoing work. The current approach also does not account for uncertainty in the mobile manipulatorвҖҷs configuration or in its actuators, whose effects must still be modelled and incorporated into both the controller and the constraints. Future work for the planner shall demonstrate and validate its versatility across alternative platforms and tasks, whilst addressing voxel reclassification and providing formal guar-antees on coverage and global behaviour. REFERENCES [1] OECD/NEA, Summary of the N EA workshop on the application of remote and robotic systems in nuclear back-end activities вҖ“ way forward in system implementation , Jan. 2019. [2] S. Isler, R. Sabzevari, J. Delmerico, and D. Scaramuzza, вҖңAn infor-mation gain formulation for active volumetric 3D reconstruction,вҖқ in 

2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , IEEE, May 2016, pp. 3477вҖ“3484. [3] A. Bircher, M. Kamel, K. Alexis, H. Oleynikova, and R. Siegwart, вҖңReceding Horizon вҖқNext-Best-ViewвҖқ Planner for 3D Exploration,вҖқ in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , IEEE, May 2016, pp. 1462вҖ“1468. [4] F. Dursun, B. V. Adorno, S. Watson, and W. Pan, Object-reconstruction-aware whole-body control of mobile manipulators ,2025. arXiv: 2509.04094 [cs.RO] .[5] J. I. Vasquez-Gomez, L. E. Sucar, and R. Murrieta-Cid, вҖңView planning for 3D object reconstruction with a mobile manipulator robot,вҖқ in 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , IEEE, Sep. 2014, pp. 4227вҖ“4233. [6] M. Naazare, F. G. Rosas, and D. Schulz, вҖңOnline next-best-view planner for 3D-exploration and inspection with a mobile manipulator robot,вҖқ IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 7, pp. 3779вҖ“ 3786, 2 Apr. 2022. [7] B. Englot and F. S. Hover, вҖңThree-dimensional coverage planning for an underwater inspection robot,вҖқ International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 32, pp. 1048вҖ“1073, 9-10 Aug. 2013. [8] A. Bircher et al., вҖңThree-dimensional coverage path planning via viewpoint resampling and tour optimization for aerial robots,вҖқ Au-tonomous Robots , vol. 40, pp. 1059вҖ“1078, 6 Aug. 2016. [9] L. Heng, A. Gotovos, A. Krause, and M. Pollefeys, вҖңEfficient visual exploration and coverage with a micro aerial vehicle in unknown environments,вҖқ in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , IEEE, May 2015, pp. 1071вҖ“1078. [10] S. Song, D. Kim, and S. Jo, вҖңOnline coverage and inspection plan-ning for 3D modeling,вҖқ Autonomous Robots , vol. 44, pp. 1431вҖ“1450, Nov. 2020. [11] A. Batinovic, J. Goricanec, L. Markovic, and S. Bogdan, вҖңPath planning with potential field-based obstacle avoidance in a 3D environment by an unmanned aerial vehicle,вҖқ Jun. 2023. [12] A. D. Ames, S. Coogan, M. Egerstedt, G. Notomista, K. Sreenath, and P. Tabuada, вҖңControl barrier functions: Theory and applications,вҖқ in 2019 18th European Control Conference (ECC) , IEEE, Jun. 2019, pp. 3420вҖ“3431. [13] S. M. LaValle, Planning algorithms . Cambridge University Press, 2006. [14] A. D. Ames, J. W. Grizzle, and P. Tabuada, вҖңControl barrier func-tion based quadratic programs with application to adaptive cruise control,вҖқ in 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control , IEEE, Dec. 2014, pp. 6271вҖ“6278. [15] S.-C. Hsu, X. Xu, and A. D. Ames, вҖңControl barrier function based quadratic programs with application to bipedal robotic walking,вҖқ in 2015 American Control Conference (ACC) , IEEE, Jul. 2015, pp. 4542вҖ“4548. [16] F. Ferraguti, M. Bertuletti, C. T. Landi, M. Bonfe, C. Fantuzzi, and C. Secchi, вҖңA control barrier function approach for maximizing performance while fulfilling to ISO/TS 15066 regulations,вҖқ IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 5, pp. 5921вҖ“5928, 4 Oct. 2020. [17] M. M. Marinho, B. V. Adorno, K. Harada, and M. Mitsuishi, вҖңDynamic Active Constraints for Surgical Robots Using Vector-Field Inequalities,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1166вҖ“1185, Oct. 2019. Accessed: May 4, 2018. [18] F. Dursun, B. V. Adorno, S. Watson, and W. Pan, вҖңMaintaining Visibility of Dynamic Objects in Cluttered Environments Using Mo-bile Manipulators and Vector Field Inequalities,вҖқ in 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) ,Detroit, MI, USA: IEEE, Oct. 2023, pp. 6371вҖ“6378. [19] J. J. Quiroz-Omana and B. V. Adorno, вҖңWhole-Body Control With (Self) Collision Avoidance Using Vector Field Inequalities,вҖқ IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 4048вҖ“4053, Oct. 2019. [20] M. M. Marinho and B. V. Adorno, вҖңAdaptive Constrained Kinematic Control Using Partial or Complete Task-Space Measurements,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 3498вҖ“3513, Dec. 2022. [21] D. S. J. Derwent, S. Watson, and B. V. Adorno, вҖңMulti-contact posture generation using vector field inequalities,вҖқ in Towards Au-tonomous Robotic Systems , Springer Nature Switzerland, 2026, pp. 111вҖ“123. [22] A. Agrawal and K. Sreenath, вҖңDiscrete control barrier functions for safety-critical control of discrete systems with application to bipedal robot navigation,вҖқ in Robotics: Science and Systems XIII , Robotics: Science and Systems Foundation, Jul. 2017. [23] Y. Xiong, D.-H. Zhai, M. Tavakoli, and Y. Xia, вҖңDiscrete-time control barrier function: High-order case and adaptive case,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , vol. 53, pp. 3231вҖ“3239, 5 May 2023. [24] A. Clark, вҖңControl barrier functions for stochastic systems,вҖқ Auto-matica , vol. 130, p. 109 688, 2021, ISSN : 0005-1098. [25] R. Lin and M. Egerstedt, Stochastic control barrier functions under state estimation: From euclidean space to lie groups , 2026. arXiv: 

2601.16198 [eess.SY] .[26] P. Mestres, B. Werner, R. K. Cosner, and A. D. Ames, Probabilistic control barrier functions: Safety in probability for discrete-time stochastic systems , 2026. arXiv: 2510.01501 [eess.SY] .[27] M. Farina, L. Giulioni, and R. Scattolini, вҖңStochastic linear model predictive control with chance constraints вҖ“ a review,вҖқ Journal of Process Control , vol. 44, pp. 53вҖ“67, Aug. 2016. [28] J. J. Quiroz-OmaЛң na and B. V. Adorno, вҖңWhole-Body Kinematic Control of Nonholonomic Mobile Manipulators Using Linear Pro-gramming,вҖқ Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems , vol. 91, no. 2, pp. 263вҖ“278, Aug. 2018. [29] M. H. Gu, C. Cho, H. Y. Chu, N. W. Kang, and J. G. Lee, вҖңUncertainty propagation on a nonlinear measurement model based on taylor expansion,вҖқ Measurement and Control (United Kingdom) ,vol. 54, pp. 209вҖ“215, Mar. 2021. [30] A. Papoulis and S. U. Pillai, Probability, random variables, and stochastic processes . McGraw-Hill, 2002. [31] A. Hornung, K. M. Wurm, M. Bennewitz, C. Stachniss, and W. Bur-gard, вҖңOctoMap: An efficient probabilistic 3D mapping framework based on octrees,вҖқ Autonomous Robots , 2013. [32] M. M. Marinho, J. J. Quiroz-OmaЛң na, and K. Harada, вҖңA multiarm robotic platform for scientific exploration: Its design, digital twins, and validation,вҖқ IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine , vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 10вҖ“20, 2024. [33] B. V. Adorno and M. Marques Marinho, вҖңDQ Robotics: A Library for Robot Modeling and Control,вҖқ IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine , vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 102вҖ“116, Sep. 2021. [34] W. Xu and F. Zhang, FAST-LIO: A fast, robust LiDAR-inertial odometry package by tightly-coupled iterated Kalman Filter , 2021. arXiv: 2010.08196 [cs.RO] .[35] R. B. Rusu and S. Cousins, вҖң3D is here: Point cloud library (PCL),вҖқ in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation ,IEEE, May 2011.