Title: 2609.08409v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.08409v1

Published Time: Wed, 09 Sep 2026 03:02:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Coverage Path Planning for Redundant Manipulators using Generalized Spanning Trees 

Raksi Kopo, Kostas J. Kyriakopoulos 

Abstract — Surface coverage with task-redundant manipu-lators is challenging because each surface point may admit multiple inverse kinematics (IK) solutions, and con fi guration choices strongly affect motion quality. This paper extends the classical Spanning Tree Coverage (STC) method to redundant manipulators through of fl ine and online Joint Spanning Tree Coverage (JSTC) algorithms. Of fl ine JSTC samples multiple Inverse Kinematics (IK) solutions per grid cell and formu-lates the problem as a Generalized Minimum Spanning Tree (GMST), selecting one con fi guration per cell and tracing the resulting tree to obtain a non-revisiting coverage path. Online JSTC incrementally expands and backtracks a spanning tree with feasibility and cost evaluation while handling dynamic grid updates. Simulation results show that of fl ine JSTC reduces computation time, recon fi gurations, and joint motion compared to other methods, while online JSTC achieves fast per-step planning in dynamic scenarios. 

I. INTRODUCTION Surface coverage tasks, such as cleaning and polishing, re-quire a robot to sweep a tool over a surface while respecting kinematic constraints. For task-redundant manipulators, each surface point may admit multiple Inverse Kinematics (IK) solutions, and the choice of con fi guration strongly affects motion quality. When the robot’s workspace and the surface are partially known or dynamically changing, coverage must be performed online. In this work, we extend a classical ef fi cient coverage path planning (CPP) algorithm for 2D mobile robots, the Spanning Tree Coverage (STC) [1] method, to surface cov-erage with task-redundant manipulators. STC operates on a connected grid representation of the surface. Each grid cell is called a mega-cell and is decomposed into its four sub-cells. The STC method outputs a non-revisiting coverage tour that covers every sub-cell of every completely free mega-cell by building a spanning tree of the grid and then tracing the sub-cells around it. The spanning tree can be constructed of fl ine using Depth First Search (DFS), or by solving a Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) problem [2]. While MST is typically more computationally expensive than DFS, it optimizes a desired user-de fi ned edge-cost objective. In the online version, the spanning tree is constructed online using DFS in O(N ) time. We extend STC to task-redundant manipulators in both of fl ine and online settings, resulting in of fl ine Joint Spanning Tree Coverage (JSTC) and online JSTC. In the of fl ine version, the problem is modeled as a Generalized Minimum The authors are with the Center for AI & Robotics (CAIR) and the Elec-trical Eng. Program, Engineering Division, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. E-mails: {rk4585,kkyria }@nyu.edu. Spanning Tree Problem (GMSTP) [3]: multiple IK solutions are sampled for each grid cell, and a graph is built by connecting IK solutions of neighboring cells with edges. Those edges are assigned a weight based on the cost of the motion connecting them. A minimum-cost tree is built in the robot’s con fi guration space that covers every grid cell by choosing one IK solution from each. For each sub-cell, we fi nd IK solutions near its mega-cell IK solution using an optimization-based solver. Finally, the sub-cells of the tree are traced as in the original STC to fi nd the con fi guration space coverage path. In the online version, the tree is expanded using DFS and feasibility checking: at each tree edge extension step, we identify the unvisited neighboring cells of the current cell that the robot can reach from its current con fi guration and choose the one with the lowest path cost. If no feasible extension is available, the robot backtracks the tree branch to the last cell with a feasible extension available. Due to updates in G, a tree may be decomposed into multiple components. In that case, each component is treated as a separate tree to be covered if it still has unvisited subcells. To evaluate the of fl ine version of our algorithm, we compare it with the related work on coverage with redundant manipulators, Joint Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem (JGTSP) [4] and hierarchical JGTSP (HJGTSP) [5], in a benchmark task in simulation. For the online version of our algorithm, we evaluate its effectiveness in several characteristic scenarios in simulation. The rest of this work is organized as follows: In Section II, we provide a literature review of online CPP methods and methods for manipulator-based surface coverage. In Section III, we describe the of fl ine JSTC algorithm and in Section IV, the online JSTC algorithm. Next, in Section V, we evaluate our algorithms in simulation. Finally, in Section VI we provide concluding remarks and future work directions. II. LITERATURE REVIEW CPP fi nds many applications in autonomous cleaning [6], manufacturing [7], and structure inspection and mainte-nance [8]. CPP problems can be categorized according to the type of robot considered (mobile or manipulator), the number of robots involved (single- or multi-robot coverage) [9], the characteristics of the environment (2D or 3D, fl at or curved, known or unknown, static or dynamic), and the optimization objective (e.g., minimizing energy consumption, number of turns, overlap, or manipulator recon fi gurations) [5]. A comprehensive review of CPP methods can be found in [10]. A. Online 2D CPP methods 

Online CPP methods plan a coverage path in an environ-ment that is not fully known in advance but is gradually discovered or changing with time due to dynamic obstacles, the introduction of new obstacles, and/or areas to be cov-ered. In such cases, the robot should be able to ef fi ciently compute the coverage path to cover a newly discovered area and avoid a newly discovered obstacle. A class of probabilistically complete, online CPP methods [11], [12] relies on random walks such as Brownian motion or L´ evy 

fl ight to cover the environment. Compared to deterministic algorithms, these methods perform worse in terms of overlap and coverage time; however, they require no localization and mapping. Decomposition-based methods [13], [14] split the environment into cells that can be covered by simple back-and-forth motions, then graph traversal methods such as DFS or the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) are used to determine the visiting order of the cells. In [15], the authors develop an online version of the Morse decomposition-based coverage method by incrementally constructing the Morse decomposition as the robot explores the environment. In [16], the online STC method is extended to handle dynamic obstacles with various relative velocities with respect to the robot. Finally, the method in [17] works for partially known 2D static environments by replanning parts of of fl ine precomputed coverage paths. 

B. CPP methods for surface coverage with manipulators 

The aforementioned methods are primarily designed for mobile robots (or purely task-space end-effector (EE) paths). Surface CPP for manipulators poses unique challenges aris-ing from the manipulator’s kinematics. Points on the surface can be covered by zero, one, or multiple robot con fi gurations, depending on the robot’s tool type, kinematics, external obstacles, and joint limits. Finding a complete coverage path, i.e., a con fi guration path that connects one IK solution from each point while avoiding recon fi gurations, such as large nullspace joint motion or tool lift-offs, is a challeng-ing problem. In the JGTSP method [4], this problem is formulated as a Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem (GTSP). This method starts by uniformly sampling multiple tool poses that cover the surface and multiple IK solutions for each tool pose. Then, an undirected weighted graph is built by connecting IK solutions from different points with edges. The weight of each edge represents the cost of moving from one of its endpoint IK solutions to the other; recon fi gurations are assigned high costs. Solving the associated GTSP for that graph means fi nding a minimum-cost tour that visits every tool pose, choosing only one IK solution from each. Due to the combinatorial complexity of GTSP with respect to the graph nodes, this method is limited to of fl ine settings, relatively small surfaces, and few IK samples per pose. A hierarchically accelerated variant was proposed in [5], improving scalability and reducing computation time, but still requiring of fl ine computation. An-other class of methods [18] for non-redundant manipulators begins by projecting the different disconnected components of the surface-constrained con fi guration space (SCCS) onto the task surface. For surface points that admit IK solutions belonging to multiple disconnected SCCS components, the algorithm selects the component from which the point should be covered to minimize the transitions between disconnected components (i.e., tool lift-offs). Despite the extensive literature on online CPP for 2D mobile robots, existing methods do not directly extend to task-redundant manipulators, where each surface point may admit multiple IK solutions and the choice of con fi guration affects motion quality. Likewise, manipulator-based surface coverage methods such as JGTSP [4], [5] primarily target of fl ine settings and require solving combinatorial optimiza-tion problems over many sampled IK solutions, which limits their applicability to online scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, no prior method provides online surface coverage for task-redundant manipulators while explicitly accounting for multiple IK solutions per surface point. This gap moti-vates the proposed of fl ine and online JSTC algorithms, which retain the ef fi ciency and non-revisiting structure of STC over the reachable subset of cells to be covered while selecting feasible low-cost motions in the robot’s con fi guration space. The main contributions are twofold: an ef fi cient of fl ine JSTC method for surface CPP with task-redundant manipu-lators, and an online JSTC extension that handles dynamic surface updates. III. OFFLINE JSTC In this section, we formalize the of fl ine coverage problem for known surfaces and present the proposed of fl ine Joint Spanning Tree Coverage (JSTC) algorithm. An illustrative diagram of the algorithm is shown in Fig. 1. 

A. Problem Formulation 

Let ξ ∈ Rk be the con fi guration of a k-DoF manipulator equipped with a coverage tool. Let the coverage-effective pose of the tool be described by its position pt(ξ) ∈ R3 and axis direction nt(ξ) ∈ R3. We write 

xt(ξ) = [ pt(ξ)T , nt(ξ)T ]T . (1) Let G = ( C, E ) be a square grid graph representing the part of the surface to be covered, where C is the set of N

cells and E is the set of edges induced by 4-neighborhood connectivity. Following STC terminology, the cells of G are called mega-cells. Each mega-cell is decomposed into four equal sub-cells, giving a fi ner graph Gs = ( Cs, E s), also with 4-neighborhood connectivity. We denote the four sub-cells of a mega-cell c ∈ C by Cs(c) ⊂ Cs, and the parent mega-cell of a sub-cell s ∈ Cs by μ(s) ∈ C.For any cell a ∈ C ∪ Cs, let p(a) ∈ R3 be the position of its center on the surface and n(a) ∈ R3 the surface normal at that point. The coverage target of a is de fi ned as 

x(a) = [ p(a)T , n(a)T ]T . (2) A con fi guration ξ is an IK solution of a if xt(ξ) = x(a).This task constrains the tool position and normal direction, leaving rotation about the tool axis free. Therefore, the Fig. 1. Illustration of the main steps of the of fl ine and online JSTC algorithms. Mega-cell IK solutions are shown as red dots, whereas sub-cell IK solutions are shown in green. The upper row illustrates the of fl ine pipeline, including IK sampling and propagation, joint-space graph construction, GMST solution, and sub-cell tracing. A tree-edge crossing example is also shown. The lower row illustrates the online procedure, visualising the tree at characteristic steps of the algorithm. During the extension-validity check at step n = 3 , candidate extensions that would disconnect the remaining unvisited sub-cells are rejected. During the update step at step n = 8 , the removal of a mega-cell, shown by hatching, splits the spanning tree into two components. One of them has no unvisited sub-cells, thus it is labeled as “ fi nished”. manipulator is task-redundant when k > 5. This de fi nition corresponds to applications such as surface cleaning or polishing with a cylindrical rotating brush. Other applications can be handled by replacing x(a) and xt(ξ) with analogous task-speci fi c kinematic constraints. The coverage task is to compute a sequence of sub-cell IK solutions 

Ξ = ξs1, ξs2, . . . , ξs4N , (3) where each sub-cell s ∈ Cs is visited once and ξs is an IK solution of s. The desired path should have low joint motion and few recon fi gurations. Instead of directly optimizing the full sub-cell path, of fl ine JSTC fi rst builds a low-cost tree over mega-cell IK solutions and then traces the corresponding sub-cells around this tree, as in STC. We de fi ne a recon fi guration similarly to [5]. Given two IK solutions ξ1 and ξ2 of cells a1 and a2, respectively, the transition between them is called a recon fi guration if any of the following conditions holds:  

> •

a1 and a2 are not neighboring cells;  

> •

ξ1 −ξ2∞ > τ1, where τ1 > 0 is the maximum allowed joint displacement;  

> •

along the straight-line interpolation in joint space be-tween ξ1 and ξ2, the tool deviates from both endpoint targets by more than τ2 > 0.The deviation between two coverage targets x1 = [ pT 

> 1

, nT 

> 1

]T

and x2 = [ pT 

> 2

, nT 

> 2

]T is 

∆(x1, x2) = p1 − p22 + α arccos( nT 

> 1

n2), (4) where α > 0 is a weighting constant. We denote by 

A(ξ1, ξ2) ∈  0, 1 the indicator that equals one when the transition is a recon fi guration. 

B. Of fl ine JSTC Algorithm 

Of fl ine JSTC consists of four steps: IK sampling and propagation, joint graph construction, GMST solving, and sub-cell tracing. The pseudocode of of fl ine JSTC is given in Algorithm 1. 

a) IK sampling and propagation: For each mega-cell 

c ∈ C, we sample m IK solutions 

ΞGc = ξc

> 1

, ξc

> 2

, . . . , ξcm. (5) This is done by uniformly sampling m initial seed con fi gura-tions ξseed  

> i

, i = 1 , . . . , m , within the joint limits and running an optimization-based IK solver for the target x(c). The solver is initialized at ξseed  

> i

and minimizes the joint distance from this seed. We write 

ξci = IK( x(c), ξseed  

> i

), i = 1 , . . . , m. (6) In our implementation, we set m = 100 and solve the IK problem using CasADi’s IPOPT solver [19]. Similar IK solutions are merged using DBSCAN [20]. Each mega-cell IK solution is then propagated to the four sub-cells of the same mega-cell. For every s ∈ Cs(c), we compute 

ξci,s = IK( x(s), ξci ), (7) using the mega-cell IK solution as the initial guess. We retain 

ξci only if it can be propagated to all four sub-cells of c. If no IK solution of a mega-cell can be propagated to all of its sub-cells, that mega-cell is removed from G.

b) Joint graph construction: We construct a general-ized graph whose clusters correspond to mega-cells. Each cluster contains the feasible IK solutions of one mega-cell. Edges are added only between IK solutions of neighboring mega-cells. For two IK solutions ξca 

> i

and ξcb 

> j

, the edge weight is 

wξca 

> i

, ξcb

> j

 =



ξca 

> i

− ξcb 

> j

2, if (ca, c b) ∈ E ∧ A = 0 ,B, if (ca, c b) ∈ E ∧ A = 1 ,

∞, otherwise ,

(8) where B is a large positive constant penalizing recon fi gura-tions between neighbor megacells. 

c) Solving the GMST problem: We solve a Generalized Minimum Spanning Tree Problem (GMSTP) on the con-structed graph. In our implementation, we use the ef fi cient heuristic algorithm of [21], which is based on local search and has complexity O(( mN )2). The output is a generalized spanning tree 

T = ( C, E T , ΞT , Ξs,T ), (9) where ET ⊆ E is the selected tree edge set, ΞT contains one selected IK solution per mega-cell, and Ξs,T contains the sub-cell IK solutions propagated from the selected mega-cell IK solutions. 

d) Sub-cell tracing: The sub-cell path is obtained by tracing around the selected tree, as in STC. Starting from an arbitrary sub-cell, the algorithm repeatedly moves to an unvisited neighboring sub-cell using admissible moves. A move from sub-cell s to sub-cell s′ is admissible if s′ is a 4-neighbor of s and either: i) μ(s)̸ = μ(s′) and (μ(s), μ (s′)) ∈

ET , or ii) μ(s) = μ(s′) and the move does not cross any tree edge incident to μ(s). For two neighboring sub-cells inside the same mega-cell c, the move crosses an incident tree edge (c, d ) ∈ ET only when both sub-cells lie on the side of c adjacent to d (see Fig. 1). This rule makes the trace follow the boundary of the tree without crossing tree edges as shown in Fig. 1. After the ordered sub-cell path 

Ps = s1, s 2, . . . , s 4N  (10) is obtained, the fi nal con fi guration-space coverage path is 

Ξ = ξs1, ξs2, . . . , ξs4N , (11) where each ξsℓ is the propagated IK solution associated with the selected mega-cell IK solution of μ(sℓ).

Algorithm 1: Of fl ine Joint Spanning Tree Coverage 

Input: Mega-cell graph G = ( C, E ), sub-cell graph 

Gs = ( Cs, E s), IK solver 

Output: Con fi guration-space coverage path Ξ 

> 1 foreach

c ∈ C do 2 ΞGc ← sample and merge IK solutions for x(c).; Propagate each ξci ∈ ΞGc to all s ∈ Cs(c).; Remove IK solutions that fail propagation.; if 

ΞGc = ∅ then 3 Remove c from G and remove Cs(c) from 

Gs.;  

> 4

end 5 end 6 Build the generalized graph with clusters ΞGc c∈C

and edge weights from (8).;  

> 7

Solve the GMSTP to obtain T = ( C, E T , ΞT , Ξs,T ).;  

> 8

Ps ← trace sub-cells around T using admissible non-crossing moves.;  

> 9

Ξ ← propagated IK solutions in Ξs,T ordered by Ps.;  

> 10 return

Ξ;IV. ONLINE JSTC In this section, we present the online version of JSTC for the case where the surface graph is partially known or changes during execution. An illustrative diagram and representative examples are shown in Fig. 1. 

A. Problem Formulation 

Let Gn = ( C n, E n) and Gns = ( C ns , E ns ) denote the mega-cell and sub-cell graphs at planning step n, respec-tively. A graph update process modi fi es Gn during execu-tion by adding or removing mega-cells. Added mega-cells correspond to newly discovered regions to be covered, while removed mega-cells correspond to regions that are no longer available or no longer required for coverage. The goal is to incrementally construct a con fi guration-space path Ξ that covers every sub-cell of every reachable mega-cell that remains in the updated graph. Unlike of fl ine JSTC, the full graph is not assumed to be fi xed in advance, and therefore the generalized spanning tree and the associ-ated sub-cell path must be built and updated online. The algorithm maintains a forest 

F n = T n 

> 1

, T n 

> 2

, . . . , (12) where each tree belongs to a connected component of Gn.Each tree is written as 

T = ( CT , E T , ΞT , Ξs,T , Ps,T ), (13) where CT is the set of mega-cells in the tree, ET is the tree edge set, ΞT stores one IK solution per mega-cell, Ξs,T 

stores the propagated sub-cell IK solutions, and Ps,T is the ordered sequence of visited sub-cells. We write ξT (c) for the IK solution of mega-cell c and ξs,T (s) for the IK solution of sub-cell s. Each tree is rooted at the mega-cell from which it was initialized, and the parent relation induced by ET is used during backtracking. A tree is un fi nished if it contains unvisited sub-cells. If the robot is already in an un fi nished tree, that tree remains active. Otherwise, the nearest un fi nished tree is selected, and RRT-Connect [22] is used to connect the current robot con fi guration to that tree. 

B. Online JSTC Algorithm 

The online procedure is summarized in Algorithm 2. It builds the tree through two operations: extension and 

backtracking . Extension adds a neighboring mega-cell to the active tree, while backtracking traces the tree backward through unvisited sub-cells until a sub-cell of the parent mega-cell is reached. For compactness, the pseudocode uses the following helper operations. IKProp( c, ξ0) computes an IK solution for mega-cell c initialized at ξ0 and propagates it to all sub-cells of c using our IK solver; it returns failure if either the mega-cell IK or any sub-cell propagation fails. neigh F (c)

denotes neighboring mega-cells of c that do not belong to any tree in the current forest. TraceToNeigh( s, C ′

> s

, E ′)

traces admissible unvisited sub-cells in μ(s) starting from 

s until the fi rst unvisited sub-cell in C ′ 

> s

is reached, without crossing edges in E′. ConnOK( P, T , G s) checks whether the remaining unvisited sub-cells connected to the ac-tive tree remain connected after adding path P. Finally, 

Append Ξ(P, Ξs,T ) appends to Ξ the IK solutions stored in 

Ξs,T and associated with the sub-cell path P; if a transition is a recon fi guration, the corresponding motion is planned using RRT-Connect. At initialization, the current mega-cell ccur and sub-cell 

scur are determined from the robot state. An IK solution is computed for ccur and propagated to its four sub-cells. A tree is then initialized with this mega-cell, its IK solution, its propagated sub-cell IK solutions, and the initial visited sub-cell. After each iteration, graph updates are incorporated into the forest. Removed mega-cells are deleted from their trees. If this disconnects a tree, each connected component with unvisited sub-cells is kept as a separate un fi nished tree (see Fig. 1). Components whose sub-cells have all been visited are marked as fi nished. New trees are initialized for uncovered connected components that do not contain an un fi nished tree and admit a feasible IK solution. 

a) Extension: The extension operation is described in Algorithm 3. Given the current mega-cell ccur , a candidate extension is a neighboring mega-cell v ∈ neigh F (ccur ). The algorithm computes an IK solution for v using ξT (ccur ) as the initial guess and propagates it to all sub-cells of v. If IK propagation succeeds, a tree edge e = ( ccur , v ) is formed. The sub-cell extension path is obtained by tracing admis-sible unvisited sub-cells until an unvisited sub-cell of v is 

fi rst encountered. The move is valid only if it does not cross the existing tree edges or the new edge, and if adding the path does not disconnect the remaining unvisited sub-cells, 

Algorithm 2: Online Joint Spanning Tree Coverage 

Input: G0, G0

> s

, IK solver, graph update process 

Output: Con fi guration-space coverage path Ξ 

> 1

Initialize ccur and scur .; 

(ξT (ccur ), Ξs,T ) ← IKProp( ccur , ξseed ).; Initialize 

T with ccur , scur , ξT (ccur ), and Ξs,T .; Set 

F ←  T  and Ξ ←  ξs,T (scur ).;  

> 2 for

n = 1 to Nmax do 3 (Gn, G ns , F n) ← UpdateF( Gn−1, G n−1 

> s

, F n−1).; Mark fi nished trees and initialize new feasible trees in uncovered components.;  

> 4

if F has no un fi nished tree then 5 break ; 

> 6

end 7 T ← SelectTree( F, s cur ).;  

> 8

if the active tree changes then 9 scur ← last( Ps,T ).; 

Ξ ← Ξ ◦ RRTConnect(last( Ξ), ξs,T (scur )) .; 

ccur ← μ(scur ).;  

> 10

end 11 V ← neigh F (ccur ).; 

D ←  Extend( T , F, G s, v ) : v ∈ V \ ∅ .;  

> 12

if D̸ = ∅ then 13 ∆T ← arg min ∆∈D J(∆).; Apply ∆T to T .; 

Ps,T ← Ps,T ◦ Pext .; 

Ξ ← Ξ ◦ Append Ξ(Pext , Ξs,T ).;  

> 14

else 15 Pback ← Backtrack( T , G s).; 

Ps,T ← Ps,T ◦ Pback .; 

Ξ ← Ξ ◦ Append Ξ(Pback , Ξs,T ).;  

> 16

end 17 scur ← last( Ps,T ).; ccur ← μ(scur ).;  

> 18 end 19 return

Ξ;as shown in Fig. 1. Among all valid extensions, the algorithm selects the one with the lowest transition cost. 

b) Backtracking: If no valid extension exists, the algo-rithm backtracks as described in Algorithm 4. Backtracking does not add a new mega-cell. Instead, it traces admissible unvisited sub-cells of the current mega-cell until it reaches the fi rst unvisited sub-cell of the parent mega-cell. If the current mega-cell is the root, the remaining sub-cells of the root are visited and the active tree is marked as fi nished. The tracing routines use the same fi xed neighbor ordering as of fl ine JSTC. Therefore, “ fi rst encountered” refers to the 

fi rst admissible sub-cell found under this ordering. When the active tree is fi nished, another un fi nished tree is selected from the forest. If the new tree is not directly reachable through the current coverage graph, RRT-Connect is used to connect the robot to it. The algorithm stops when all trees are fi nished. V. SIMULATIONS In this section, we validate both of fl ine and online JSTC. We compare of fl ine JSTC with the JGTSP [4] and HJGTSP Algorithm 3: Tree Extension 

Input: T , F , Gs, candidate mega-cell v, IK solver 

Output: Extension plan ∆T or failure  

> 1

scur ← last( Ps,T ), ccur ← μ(scur ).;  

> 2

(ξv, ξss∈Cs(v)) ← IKProp( v, ξT (ccur )) .;  

> 3 if

IK propagation fails then 4 return failure;  

> 5 end 6

e ← (ccur , v ).; 

Pext ← TraceToNeigh( scur , C s(v), E T ∪  e).;  

> 7 if

Pext = ∅ then 8 return failure;  

> 9 end 10 if

¬ConnOK( Ps,T ∪ Pext , T , G s) then 11 return failure;  

> 12 end 13

Jext ← w(ξT (ccur ), ξv).;  

> 14 return

∆T = ( v, e, ξv, ξss∈Cs(v), Pext , J ext );

Algorithm 4: Tree Backtracking 

Input: Active tree T , sub-cell graph Gs

Output: Backtracking path segment Pback  

> 1

scur ← last( Ps,T ), ccur ← μ(scur ).;  

> 2 if

ccur = root( T ) then 3 Pback ← TraceRemaining( ccur , E T ).; Mark T as 

fi nished.; return Pback ; 

> 4 end 5

cp ← parent T (ccur ).; 

Pback ← TraceToNeigh( scur , C s(cp), E T ).;  

> 6 return

Pback ;algorithms [5] in the “Scan Floor” benchmark task [5], where a 7 DoF Franka Emika Panda robot uses a 6 DoF rectangular handheld detector to scan the fl oor around it for potential chemical or radioactive leaks (see Fig. 2 (upper left)). For both JGTSP and HJGTSP, the GLKH heuristic solver [23] is used to solve the associated GTSPs. This solver has empirical computational complexity O(N 2.2

> nodes

) where Nnodes is the total number of graph nodes, in this case IK solutions. We test the online JSTC in a table cleaning application where a 7 DoF KUKA LBR iiwa robot equipped with a spherical brush is tasked to clean a table represented by a 8 × 8 grid with resolution 15 mega-cells per meter. The tool tip is positioned at the center of the sub-cell under consideration. The rotation about the tool axis is unrestricted, while deviations from the surface normal are bounded within a cone of half-angle, as depicted in Fig. 3a) left. We test our algorithm in fi ve cases: 1) free grid (see Fig. 3a)), 2) an external obstacle (see Fig. 3b)), 3) internal obstacles (i.e. removed grid mega-cells) (see Fig. 4a)), 4) disconnected graph (see Fig. 4b)), 5) removal of tree mega-cells. All tests for all methods were performed on a laptop with an Intel Core i9-11900H processor running at 2.50 GHz, and with 32 GB of RAM. Simulation videos showing the robot’s motion are provided 1.

A. Of fl ine JSTC test results 

We repeated the test 10 times to account for the random-ness of the IK sampling. We used the following metrics to compare the three approaches: 1) mean computation time, 2) mean number of recon fi gurations, and 3) mean total joint motion. We also give the number of EE targets, which for our method corresponds to the number of sub-cells of G.For JGTSP and HJGTSP, this corresponds to the number of sampled surface points. The results are summarized in Table I along with path errors, while the resulting tool paths are shown in Fig. 2. We notice that our method outperforms JGTSP in terms of computation time, number of recon fi gu-rations, and total joint motion. This can be understood since the JGTSP solver solves a high-dimensional GTSP problem on a graph with at most Ntargets = 674 · m nodes, while our algorithm solves the GMST on G, which has only N = 179 

mega-cells, thus 179 · m nodes. The signi fi cantly lower performance in the number of recon fi gurations and joint movement is attributed to the performance of the heuristic GTSP solver, which deteriorates for larger numbers of nodes. HJGTSP reduces computation time by solving a small higher-level GTSP over Nexemplars = 24 representatives and then propagating the selected IK solutions to the remain-ing Ntargets = 674 targets. However, the small number of representatives creates larger clusters, so a representative IK solution may not propagate to a good solution for all targets in its cluster. This reduced representativeness can degrade the lower-level GTSP solution, leading to higher total joint motion than our method, which uses a denser higher-level discretization ( 179 mega-cells vs 24 exemplars). Fig. 2 shows the benchmark scenario, the generated spanning tree, and the tool paths. Due to the grid structure of JSTC, our path consists of horizontal and vertical segments, whereas the mesh-based GTSP methods may include diagonal edges and sharper turns. 

B. Online JSTC test results 

In case 1) the robot is tasked to cover the grid without ob-stacles. The resulting path and tree in task space are shown in Fig. 3 a). The black mega-cells correspond to mega-cells the robot cannot reach due to its workspace limits. In case 2), we introduce a spherical obstacle on the surface shown in Fig. 3 b), along with the generated path. The obstacle causes the grid mega-cells shown in red to be unreachable by the tree (i.e. there is no valid extension for them) because of collision. In cases 3 and 4, we introduce internal obstacles by removing the tree mega-cells in black shown in Fig. 4a) and b) along with the generated paths, respectively. For each disconnected region of the grid, our algorithm developed a separate tree as shown in Fig. 4. Finally, in case 5 the robot has performed the green path shown in Fig. 5a) and encounters a grid update that removes the sixth row. This leads to the split of the tree and the path to multiple disconnected components 1https://youtu.be/Wh7PqAlNU94 TABLE I OFFLINE COVERAGE PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON THE Scan Floor BENCHMARK.                                              

> Method Computation time (s) # Recon fi gurations Total joint motion (rad) # EE targets Pos. error (m) Rot. error (rad)
> JGTSP [4] 1105 .15 ±199 .01 30 .64 ±10 .91 190 .01 ±8.70 674 9.9e −47.9e −3
> HJGTSP [5] 206 .96 ±68 .39 1.93 ±0.45 129 .38 ±1.62 674 10 .0e −410 .0e −3
> Of fl ine JSTC (ours) 264 .07 ±5.61 4.00 ±0.00 83 .14 ±2.81 716 10 .0e −410 .0e −3
> Fig. 2. The fi gure shows the Scan fl oor scenario with forward kinematics image of the generated generalized spanning tree (in red) and with black dots the mega-cell centers. The tool paths generated by the of fl ine algorithms are shown in green. The orange blue dot denotes the start, and the orange “x” marker denotes the end of each path.

shown in Fig. 5 b). The robot completes the path for each such component with the remaining unvisited mega-cells. For each run, we computed the following metrics to assess the performance of our online algorithm 1) average computation time per extension step, 2) average computation time per backtracking step, 3) average computation time per tree and path processing after an update occurs i.e., Steps 3(e), 3(f), 3(g) in Algorithm 2, 4) average joint motion per consecutive IK solutions in the path. Table II shows the results. The average extension step and backtracking step time is low for all cases (less than 70 ms). In case fi ve, where a grid update occurs, the computation time for performing the update of the grid and the associated tree and path splits is also low. The average joint displacement per step shown in the fi fth column is acceptable given that our algorithms optimize joint motion only locally compared to the of fl ine JSTC or JGTSP method, which optimized joint motion globally. Overall, the results show that our algorithm can be applied effectively online. VI. CONCLUSION We presented of fl ine and online Joint Spanning Tree Coverage (JSTC), extending Spanning Tree Coverage to surface coverage with task-redundant manipulators. Of fl ine JSTC selects one IK solution per mega-cell through a GMST   

> Fig. 3. Coverage path results for a) free grid and b) external obstacle scenarios (red sphere). The tool coverage path is denoted in green, while the forward kinematic images of the generalized spanning tree are shown in red. The red mega-cells correspond to unreachable mega-cells due to collision with the obstacle, while the black mega-cells correspond to unreachable mega-cells due to workspace limits.
> Fig. 4. Coverage path results for internal obstacles in two scenarios a) connected grid b) disconnected grid. The purple arrow denotes transitions between trees that span each disconnected grid component.

formulation and traces the resulting tree to obtain a non-revisiting sub-cell coverage path. Online JSTC incrementally extends and backtracks the tree while handling dynamic graph updates. Simulations show that of fl ine JSTC improves computational time motion quality over GTSP-based base-lines, while online JSTC achieves low per-step computation time across obstacle and update scenarios. Future work includes experimental validation and extension to curved surfaces. TABLE II ONLINE JSTC PERFORMANCE METRICS PER STEP ACROSS FIVE SCENARIOS. 

Case Extension time (ms) Backtracking time (ms) Update proc. time (ms) Avg. joint motion (rad) 

1) Free grid 31 .61 ± 3.12 0.06 ± 0.00 - 0.87 ± 0.08 

2) External obstacle 63 .91 ± 5.41 0.08 ± 0.01 - 1.41 ± 0.03 

3) Internal obstacles (removed mega-cells) 11 .41 ± 2.79 0.05 ± 0.00 - 1.21 ± 0.06 

4) Multiple disconnected grid regions 35 .97 ± 14 .32 0.07 ± 0.01 - 0.91 ± 0.02 

5) Removal of tree mega-cells 40 .37 ± 10 .81 0.07 ± 0.01 93 .09 ± 20 .10 1.12 ± 0.04 

Fig. 5. Coverage paths in the case where the tree and its associated path in a) is split into multiple components due to the removal of the mega-cells in the sixth row shown in black in b). In c), we see the completed path associated with each tree and the transitions between trees in purple. REFERENCES [1] Y. Gabriely and E. Rimon, “Spanning-tree based coverage of contin-uous areas by a mobile robot,” Annals of Mathematics and Arti fi cial Intelligence , vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 77–98, 2001. [2] R. C. Prim, “Shortest connection networks and some generalizations,” 

The Bell System Technical Journal , vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 1389–1401, 1957. [3] P. C. Pop, “The generalized minimum spanning tree problem: An overview of formulations, solution procedures and latest advances,” 

European Journal of Operational Research , vol. 283, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2020. [4] J. Hess, G. D. Tipaldi, and W. Burgard, “Null space optimization for effective coverage of 3d surfaces using redundant manipulators,” in 

2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , 2012, pp. 1923–1928. [5] Y. Wang and M. Gleicher, “Hierarchically accelerated coverage path planning for redundant manipulators,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2025, pp. 12 098–12 104. [6] D. Engelsons, M. Tiger, and F. Heintz, “Coverage path planning in large-scale multi-fl oor urban environments with applications to autonomous road sweeping,” in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE Press, 2022, p. 3328–3334. [7] M. Rososhansky and F. J. Xi, “Coverage based tool-path planning for automated polishing using contact mechanics theory,” Journal of Manufacturing Systems , vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 144–153, 2011. [8] E. Galceran, R. Campos, N. Palomeras, M. Carreras, and P. Ridao, “Coverage path planning with realtime replanning for inspection of 3d underwater structures,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2014, pp. 6586–6591. [9] N. Karapetyan, K. Benson, C. McKinney, P. Taslakian, and I. Rekleitis, “Ef fi cient multi-robot coverage of a known environment,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2017, pp. 1846–1852. [10] C. S. Tan, R. Mohd-Mokhtar, and M. R. Arshad, “A comprehensive review of coverage path planning in robotics using classical and heuristic algorithms,” IEEE Access , vol. 9, pp. 119 310–119 342, 2021. [11] I. A. Wagner, M. Lindenbaum, and A. M. Bruckstein, “Robotic exploration, brownian motion and electrical resistance,” in Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Randomization and Approx-imation Techniques in Computer Science , ser. RANDOM ’98. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1998, p. 116–130. [12] D. Sutantyo, P. Levi, C. M¨ oslinger, and M. Read, “Collective-adaptive l´ evy fl ight for underwater multi-robot exploration,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation , 2013, pp. 456–462. [13] H. Choset and P. Pignon, “Coverage path planning: The boustrophedon cellular decomposition,” in Field and Service Robotics , A. Zelinsky, Ed. London: Springer London, 1998, pp. 203–209. [14] E. U. Acar, H. Choset, A. A. Rizzi, P. N. Atkar, and D. Hull, “Morse decompositions for coverage tasks,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 331–344, 2002. [15] E. U. Acar and H. Choset, “Sensor-based coverage of unknown environments: Incremental construction of morse decompositions,” 

The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 345–366, 2002. [16] K. P. Jayalakshmi, V. G. Nair, D. Sathish, and K. R. Guruprasad, “Adaptive spanning tree-based coverage path planning for autonomous mobile robots in dynamic environments,” IEEE Access , vol. 13, pp. 102 931–102 950, 2025. [17] M. Ramesh, F. Imeson, B. Fidan, and S. L. Smith, “Anytime replanning of robot coverage paths for partially unknown environments,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 40, pp. 4190–4206, 2024. [18] T. Yang, J. Valls Miro, Q. Lai, Y. Wang, and R. Xiong, “Cellular decomposition for nonrepetitive coverage task with minimum discon-tinuities,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. PP, pp. 1–1, 08 2020. [19] J. A. E. Andersson, J. Gillis, G. Horn, J. B. Rawlings, and M. Diehl, “CasADi – A software framework for nonlinear optimization and optimal control,” Mathematical Programming Computation , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–36, 2019. [20] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,” in Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , ser. KDD’96. AAAI Press, 1996, p. 226–231. [21] B. Hu, M. Leitner, and G. Raidl, “Computing generalized minimum spanning trees with variable neighborhood search,” in Proceedings of the XVIII Mini EURO Conference on Variable Neighborhood Search ,P. Hansen, Ed., 2005. [22] J. Kuffner and S. LaValle, “RRT-connect: An ef fi cient approach to single-query path planning,” in 2000 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , vol. 2, 2000, pp. 995–1001. [23] K. Helsgaun, “Solving the equality generalized traveling salesman problem using the lin–kernighan–helsgaun algorithm,” Mathematical Programming Computation , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 269–287, 2015.