Title: Karma Mechanisms for Decentralised, Cooperative Multi Agent Path Finding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.07970v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Apr 2026 00:57:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Karma Mechanisms for Decentralised, Cooperative Multi Agent Path Finding 

Kevin Riehl 1, Julius Schlapbach 1, Anastasios Kouvelas, Michail A. Makridis 

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible. 

Abstract — Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is a funda-mental coordination problem in large-scale robotic and cyber-physical systems, where multiple agents must compute conflict-free trajectories with limited computational and communication resources. While centralised optimal solvers provide guarantees on solution optimality, their exponential computational com-plexity limits scalability to large-scale systems and real-time applicability. Existing decentralised heuristics are faster, but result in suboptimal outcomes and high cost disparities. This paper proposes a decentralised coordination framework for cooperative MAPF based on Karma mechanisms – artificial, non-tradeable credits that account for agents’ past cooperative behaviour and regulate future conflict resolution decisions. The approach formulates conflict resolution as a bilateral negoti-ation process that enables agents to resolve conflicts through pairwise replanning while promoting long-term fairness under limited communication and without global priority structures. The mechanism is evaluated in a lifelong robotic warehouse multi-agent pickup-and-delivery scenario with kinematic ori-entation constraints. The results highlight that the Karma mechanism balances replanning effort across agents, reducing disparity in service times without sacrificing overall efficiency. Code: https://github.com/DerKevinRiehl/karma dmapf 

I. INTRODUCTION Multi-robot cyber-physical systems are increasingly de-ployed in automated environments to perform coordinated tasks, including automated guided vehicles in warehouses, multi-arm assembly systems in manufacturing, coordinated cranes and vehicles at ports, and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) swarms [1]. In such settings, agents must generate motion plans that avoid collisions with both static obstacles and dynamic entities, such as fellow agents or humans. Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) formalises this problem of computing conflict-free trajectories for multiple agents from given start to goal locations on a graph representation of the environment [2]. Accordingly, MAPF has attracted significant research interest across artificial intelligence, op-erations research, robotics, and control theory. Depending on the application, previous works on MAPF differ in their discretisation of space and time, objective functions (e.g. minimizing makespan vs. sum-of-costs), di-mensionality (2D vs. 3D), constraints (kinematics, obstacles, task priorities), and simplifying assumptions regarding agent heterogeneity, execution delay, and task assignment [3], [4]. Several optimal solvers for the MAPF problem have been proposed that are guaranteed to find an optimal solution, if it  

> All authors are with Traffic Engineering Group, Institute for Transporta-tion Planning and Systems, ETH Z¨ urich, Stefano Franscini Platz 3, 8053 Z¨ urich, Switzerland. 1Kevin Riehl and Julius Schlapbach are co-first authors. Corresponding author: kriehl@ethz.ch.

exists. These can be grouped into four families: (i) reduction-based, (ii) A*-based, (iii) ICTS-based, and (iv) CBS-based approaches. Reduction-based solvers formulate MAPF as well-studied operations research problems, such as flow networks and integer linear programming [5], or branch-and-cut-and-price formulations [6]. These differ fundamen-tally from the other three search-based approaches. A*-based methods [7] explicitly construct and explore the joint state space of all agents using heuristic search, where each node represents a global configuration of all agents and the heuristic guides expansion towards states with lower estimated costs. ICTS-based (Increasing Cost Tree Search) methods [8] explore a tree whose nodes represent cost vectors for the individual agents’ trajectories. Since not every cost vector admits a conflict-free joint solution, the algorithm iteratively expands the tree by increasing individual costs until a feasible combination of trajectories is identified. CBS-based (Conflict-Based Search) [9] methods perform a two-level search: a high-level search over a binary constraint tree that branches on detected conflicts by adding pairwise constraints to agents, combined with low-level replanning of individual agents under accumulating constraints. Both ICTS and CBS typically invoke A* (or other shortest-path algorithms) to find optimal single-agent trajectories under accumulated constraints, but avoid constructing and exploring the complete time-expanded state space. While these approaches find globally optimal solutions, they rely on centralised computation and full observability, limiting their applicability in real-time and large-scale systems. Further-more, the combinatorial growth of the joint state space ren-ders these methods computationally challenging, highlighting the need for scalable control architectures. These limitations have motivated the study of decen-tralised MAPF (DMAPF), where agents make decisions based on a subset of the state space only [10]. Decen-tralised approaches align naturally with distributed control paradigms, where global coordination emerges from local interaction rules. Existing work considers both coopera-tive [11] and competitive settings [12]. Additionally, ap-proaches distinguish between offline planning and online conflict resolution, with the latter being essential for adaptive control in dynamic environments [13], [14]. Some methods rely on explicit communication protocols [14], while others employ reservation-based schemes [15] or implicit coordina-tion through behavioural prediction [16]. In a growing branch of research, such decentralised coordination is discoursed using economic terminology, such as negotiations [17], [18], sequential bargaining processes [19], and more formally as 

> arXiv:2604.07970v1 [eess.SY] 9 Apr 2026

combinatorial auctions [12]. Auction-based negotiations for MAPF can make use of artificial currencies such as merit-based tokens [18], [20], which motivates dedicated (incen-tive) mechanism designs [21]. Especially in non-cooperative settings, economic mechanisms can enable incentive com-patibility through privacy [18], and support prioritisation and fairness considerations [17], [21]. Unlike optimal centralised solvers, decentralised heuristics provide no optimality and robustness guarantees, due to limited local information. Karma mechanisms represent a class of artificial currency schemes based on non-tradeable credits [22]. Originally de-signed for resource allocation in peer-to-peer networks [23], they have been applied to coordination problems in a variety of domains, including cloud computing, telecommunication, road transportation, and social assignment and negotiation problems. A key property of Karma mechanisms is their abil-ity to incentivise cooperative behaviour in decentralised sys-tems, even among self-interested agents. By linking present actions to future earning potential, they promote forward-looking decision-making among agents. From a control perspective, they can be interpreted as distributed feedback mechanisms that shape agent decisions through economic incentives rather than explicit commands. This makes them particularly suitable for large-scale systems where direct coordination is infeasible or undesirable. In this work, we propose a Karma mechanism-based approach to DMAPF that embeds incentive dynamics directly into decentralised conflict resolution. Our framework formu-lates trajectory coordination as a distributed control problem with endogenous priority adaptation driven by agents’ co-operation history. In particular, Karma acts as an integral feedback signal that promotes fairness while preserving scalability and responsiveness in online coordination, and promotes long-term indirect reciprocity amongst agents [22]. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed mech-anism through an orientation-aware, lifelong, multi-agent pickup-and-delivery case study in a robotic warehouse-like environment. The results show that Karma-based coordina-tion achieves efficiency comparable to established decen-tralised heuristics such as token-passing and negotiation-based approaches with egoistic or altruistic policies, while significantly reducing disparities in service time across tasks. These findings establish that incentive-based feedback mech-anisms provide a principled approach to fair and scalable coordination in decentralised multi-agent control systems. The source code and related materials are available on GitHub: https://github.com/DerKevinRiehl/karma dmapf. II. PROBLEM FORMULATION & REVIEW MAPF is the problem of computing conflict-free trajecto-ries for agents from start to goal locations [18] (see Fig. 1). 

A. Definitions & Notation 

Consider n agents navigating through an environment represented as a graph G = ( V, E), with start locations si ∈ V

and goals gi ∈ V . A trajectory πi = [( si,t0), . . . , (gi,tN )] for agent i is a sequence of states, where each state is a tuple t = 1  

> t = 2
> t = 3
> t = 4
> t = 1
> t = 2
> t = 3
> t = 4
> t = 5
> t = 6
> Fig. 1. Multi Agent Path Finding Problem (MAPF).

consisting of vertex v ∈ V and discrete time step t. The cost of πi can be chosen as an arbitrary application-specific function c : Π → R≥0, where Π denotes the set of all possible trajectories. In this work, we use c(πi) = N, the trajectory length in time steps. Two trajectories πi and π j are considered conflict-free if, for any time step t ∈ { 0, . . . , T }, the two agents neither occupy the same vertex simultaneously (vertex conflict) nor traverse the same edge at the same time (edge conflict). An agent is considered idle after reaching its goal and before being assigned a new destination. 

B. Centralised MAPF with CBS 

CBS is a widely-used, optimal, centralised algorithm for solving MAPF [9]. It decomposes the problem into global coordination for conflict resolution and local trajectory gen-eration. CBS maintains a high-level search tree, referred to as the constraint tree CT , where each leaf encodes a set of constraints and a corresponding valid solution. A constraint is defined as a tuple (i, v,t) or (i, e,t), prohibiting agent i

from occupying vertex v or traversing edge e at time t.At each node of the CT , a low-level planner computes an individually optimal trajectory πi for each agent subject to the accumulated constraints. This low-level trajectory planning step is typically performed using A* search on the time-expanded graph. The resulting set of trajectories is then checked for conflicts. If no conflicts are detected at the lowest-cost leaf node, the current solution is globally feasible and optimal, and CBS terminates. Otherwise, a conflict between two agents is resolved by branching the 

CT , generating two child nodes with an added constraint for either of the conflicting agents. The high-level search proceeds by exploring the CT , using best-first search ordered by global cost. CBS is complete and cost-optimal but has an exponential worst-case time complexity in the number of agents and conflicts, motivating decentralised alternatives. 

C. Decentralised MAPF Heuristics 1) Token-Passing: Token-passing approaches establish a sequential planning order among agents, where a shared token grants planning priority. Only the agent holding the token updates its trajectory, while all other agents treat their plans as fixed [3]. Let Aplanned ⊂ { 1, . . . , n} denote the set of agents with committed trajectories. An agent i /∈ Aplanned computes its trajectory πi by solving a shortest-path problem on a time-expanded graph that avoids all reserved vertices and edges induced by {π j} j∈Aplanned .While this mechanism simplifies coordination, it is limited to sequential decision-making and leads to inefficiencies due to the neglect of interrelations in the joint state space. Moreover, the planning order creates asymmetry, with later-planning agents facing more constraints, resulting in globally suboptimal solutions. 

Algorithm 1 Negotiation-Based Coordination for MAPF  

> 1:

A i 

> considered

= [] ▷ Initialize empty list  

> 2:

πi = A* [A i

> considered

] ▷ Plan candidate trajectory  

> 3:

πi → Ci ▷ Determine conflicts  

> 4:

while |Ci| > 0 do  

> 5:

Select highest priority conflict cpi, j,t 

> 6:

cpi, j,t = arg max ci, j,t ∈Ci ∆( j) 

> i
> 7:

Negotiate conflict resolution responsibility  

> 8:

πi, π j → ∆i, ∆ j ▷ Determine costs  

> 9:

r = N (∆i, ∆ j) ∈ { i, j} 

> 10:

A r 

> considered

← A r 

> considered

∪ { ¯r} 

> 11:

πi = A* [A i

> considered

] ▷ Replanning  

> 12:

πi → Ci ▷ Recompute conflicts  

> 13:

end while 

2) Negotiation-Based Coordination: To overcome the limitations of static, fixed-order planning, agents can engage in local negotiations for pairwise conflict resolution through dynamic replanning. In this setting, each agent initially com-putes its individually optimal trajectory, ignoring others, and subsequently resolves conflicts iteratively through pairwise interaction, until all trajectories are conflict-free [2] (Alg. 1). If no solution is found for an agent, it remains at its current position until the next time step. Let πi denote the current candidate trajectory of agent i,computed while avoiding the time-expanded trajectories of agents in the subset A i 

> considered

(initially empty). The set of conflicts between πi and other agents’ trajectories is denoted as Ci, where each conflict ci, j,t ∈ Ci represents a vertex or edge conflict with agent j at a specific time step t. If πi

is conflict-free ( |Ci| = 0), the planning for i is terminated. Otherwise, agent i selects a conflict cpi, j,t ∈ Ci according to a priority rule based on deviation cost: 

cpi, j,t = arg max   

> ci,j,t∈Ci

∆( j) 

> i

(1) where ∆( j) 

> i

is the estimated trajectory cost increase for agent i

when replanning to avoid conflicting agent j.Agent i then initiates a bilateral negotiation with agent j

to resolve the conflict. Specifically, each agent computes an alternative trajectory that avoids the conflict and determines the associated cost increase relative to their current candidate trajectories, denoted by the shorthand notation ∆i = ∆( j) 

> i

and 

∆ j = ∆(i) 

> j

for agents i and j, respectively. A negotiation mechanism N (∆i, ∆ j) → r ∈ { i, j} then determines which agent r has to adapt their trajectory. t=1 t=2 

t=3 

t=4 

t=5 

t=6 

t=7 

t=9  t=10  t=11  t=12 t=8 

t=1 t=2 

t=3 

t=4  t=5  t=6  t=7 

t=9 

t=8  

> Fig. 2. Warehouse MAPD Case Study with Kinematic Constraints.

In the egoistic setting, agent j agrees to replan only if it incurs non-negative incremental cost, reflecting a purely self-interested decision rule. Formally, 

Nego (∆i, ∆ j) = 

(

j, if ∆ j ≤ 0,

i, otherwise . (2) In the altruistic setting, agent j agrees to change its tra-jectory if its cost increase is smaller than agent i’s, reflecting cooperative behaviour that seeks to minimise overall costs. Formally, 

Nalt (∆i, ∆ j) = 



j, if ∆ j < ∆i,

i, if ∆ j > ∆i,

U ({i, j}), if ∆i = ∆ j

(3) In the case ∆i = ∆ j, the assignment is resolved by random tie-breaking with uniform probabilities, denoted by U (·).After the negotiation, the selected agent r ∈ { i, j} replans its trajectory, while avoiding the other agent ¯ r = {i, j} \ r.

A r 

> considered

← A r 

> considered

∪ { ¯r}. (4) Agent i iterates this process of conflict detection and nego-tiation, until πi is conflict-free ( |Ci| = 0). III. METHODS 

A. Karma-based Negotiation Mechanism 

To regulate decentralised interactions beyond local cost comparisons, we introduce a Karma-based negotiation mech-anism. Each agent i maintains a state variable ki ∈ Z referred to as its Karma balance, which evolves over time based on past decisions. Depending on the application, the balance may be subject to redistribution mechanisms across agents or regular event-based resets. Karma can be interpreted as an internal credit that encodes an agent’s history of cooperation. From a control perspective, ki acts as an auxiliary state vari-able that introduces temporal coupling between decisions, thereby shaping future behaviour through feedback. Fig. 3. Warehouse MAPD Case Study Benchmark. 

Given a conflict between agents i and j, the Karma-based negotiation mechanism is formally defined as: 

Nkarma (∆i, ∆ j, ki, k j) = 



j, if ∆ j + τk j < ∆i + τki,

i, if ∆ j + τk j > ∆i + τki,

U ({i, j}), otherwise ,

(5) where τ ≥ 0 is a design parameter weighing the influence of the agent’s current Karma balance. This formulation biases the replanning decision towards agents with lower Karma, effectively rewarding past cooper-ative behaviour. After negotiation, the Karma balances are updated as follows, where r = Nkarma (∆i, ∆ j, ki, k j) is the replanning agent. 

kr ← kr + ∆r, k¯r ← k¯r − ∆r. (6) This update rule ensures that agents that replan in con-flicts accumulate Karma, while agents whose paths remain unchanged compensate them. As a result, agents that have replanned frequently in the past are associated with an increased composite cost in subsequent negotiations, thereby balancing the replanning burden among agents over time. The mechanism can thus be interpreted as a distributed integral feedback controller that regulates long-term indirect reciprocity in decentralised decision-making. 

B. Simulation Case Study 

We demonstrate the performance of the proposed, Karma-based DMAPF using the example of a lifelong, orientation-aware, stay-at-target, synchronous, multi-agent pickup and delivery (MAPD) setup in a discrete-time and discrete-space, robotic warehouse-like environment, as shown in Fig. 2. During the simulation, randomly generated tasks are assigned to the closest available (or soon to be available) agent, using linear sum assignment [24]. Agents navigate to their assigned task’s start location, pick up the task, navigate to its goal, and deliver the task. The environment’s graph 

G represents a square grid, where agents can move to their Von Neumann neighbourhood, while complying with their orientation-aware kinematic constraints. Each simula-tion runs for 100 time steps and is repeated for multiple random seeds, to calculate mean and standard deviation of the evaluation metrics, which include the number of completed tasks, the average cost per task, the dispersion of task costs (standard deviation), and runtime (number of A* calls). The Karma-based DMAPF is evaluated on three different grid sizes of 5 × 5, 10 × 10, and 15 × 15 cells and varying agent counts. Tasks are randomly spawned within the grid, which is surrounded by a one-cell-wide border that agents can also traverse. Trajectories are planned on a space-time graph with kinematic (orientation-aware) constraints, where the cost of a path refers to the number of time steps it takes for execution. The Karma balance of each agent is reset to ki = 0 upon pickup of a new task. IV. RESULTS 

A. General Overview 

We compare the proposed Karma-based negotiation mech-anism against the token-passing approach, as well as egoistic and altruistic negotiation policies (Eqs. (2), (3)). Fig. 3 illustrates performance in lifelong MAPD scenarios across three grid sizes (5 × 5, 10 × 10, 15 × 15). We measure the 

task time between the assignment of a task to an agent and its delivery at the goal, and the service time between pickup and delivery only. Token-passing consistently completes the fewest tasks due to its sequential planning structure and the inability to adapt previously committed trajectories. This forces later-planning agents to avoid any conflicts, resulting in longer routes and higher task completion times. Although the number of A* calls is directly proportional to the number of assigned tasks, this computational efficiency is achieved by sacrificing Fig. 4. Impact of the Karma Influence Parameter on the Increase in Task Service Time. 

solution efficiency, as evidenced by the increased task and service times. Introducing the possibility for agents to negotiate the pairwise conflict resolution responsibility improves overall average performance with more completed tasks and re-duced average costs, at the expense of additional A* calls to compute alternative trajectories and associated deviation costs. Despite less frequent trajectory changes by agents with committed solutions under the egoistic negotiation rule, this approach requires more A* calls than the other considered negotiation-based approaches. Since ∆i and ∆ j implicitly include future conflict avoidance efforts with respect to agents in A i 

> considered

(for i) or all other agents with committed trajectories (for j), the altruistic and Karma-based policies guide the system toward solutions requiring fewer agent negotiations and associated graph searches. The altruistic negotiation rule compares the anticipated cost increases ∆i and ∆ j for the respective agents under the responsibility for the conflict resolution. Since the cost equals the trajectory length from the current position to the goal, agents with longer remaining distances tend to win negotia-tions against agents with shorter trajectories. In contrast, the egoistic policy makes no such distinctions. Correspondingly, since the distance between an agent’s current position and the pickup location of an assigned task is typically smaller than the average service trajectory length from pickup to delivery in our simulation scenario (due to the linear sum assignment), the average performance advantage of the altruistic over the egoistic policy is reduced when considering the entire task duration. 

B. Effect of Karma Influence Parameter τ

The Karma-based negotiation mechanism (Eq. (5)) weighs immediate replanning costs against accumulated Karma for each agent with the influence parameter τ ∈ R≥0. At τ = 0, the mechanism reduces to the altruistic policy. Increasing τ

shifts priority from immediate replanning cost increases to-wards balancing accumulated long-term costs across agents. Fig. 4 illustrates the effect of τ on the mean task service time relative to the shortest possible path without considering other agents, for a simulation with 100 time steps (shaded region indicates the standard deviation over 20 random seeds). As the influence of the Karma balance increases, agents prioritize the equal distribution of conflict resolution efforts over immediate cost minimization, demonstrating the trade-off between the average incurred cost and its spread across tasks. At low τ values, the mechanism behaves similarly to the altruistic policy with inconsistent impact, while Karma dominates the negotiation for large τ values over the imme-diate cost, resulting in higher service times. Based on these empirical results, τ = 0.5 proved as a suitable choice for subsequent experiments, as it achieves a balance between cost efficiency and fairness. 

C. Efficiency and Variance Implications of Karma 

While the egoistic and altruistic negotiation rules consider immediate deviation costs, they do not explicitly regulate how replanning effort is distributed across agents over time. In contrast, the Karma-based negotiation mechanism introduces an additional feedback signal that accumulates past cooperation behaviour and influences future conflict resolution decisions. As a result, Karma enables a more balanced allocation of coordination effort across tasks. Fig. 5 compares the dispersion of absolute task and service times across negotiation strategies, reporting the median, interquartile range and outliers in a box plot diagram. Although the Karma-based mechanism achieves efficiency levels comparable to egoistic and altruistic negotiation in terms of average task and service time, it consistently reduces their dispersion. This indicates that Karma promotes a more equitable distribution of delays without sacrificing overall system throughput. V. CONCLUSIONS In this study, we proposed a Karma-based decentralised coordination mechanism for MAPF, in which bilateral con-flict resolution is augmented with an artificial credit balance encoding agents’ past cooperative behaviour. The resulting framework interprets decentralised trajectory coordination as a distributed control problem with endogenous priority adaptation, where Karma acts as an integral feedback sig-nal to balance long-term replanning burden. In a lifelong, orientation-aware MAPD case study, the proposed mecha-nism achieved efficiency comparable to established decen-tralised heuristics, including token-passing and negotiation-based approaches with egoistic and altruistic rules, while Fig. 5. Task and Service Time Distribution. 

reducing disparities in task and service times across tasks. These results demonstrate that incentive-based feedback can improve fairness in decentralised multi-agent coordination without sacrificing scalability or requiring centralised opti-misation. More broadly, the presented results suggest that artificial-currency feedback mechanisms are a promising direction for fair, scalable, and adaptive coordination in decentralised multi-agent control systems. The Karma update rule and its influence parameter τ were studied empirically, and their behaviour may depend on the problem setup, task density, and interaction structure. More-over, the current study focuses primarily on task and service time statistics, whereas other notions of fairness, robustness, and communication overhead deserve further analysis. Future work therefore might address an analysis of stability, conver-gence, and performance bounds of Karma-based negotiation. Furthermore, the impact of different Karma payment rules (pay-to-peer vs. pay-to-society), limitation of Karma bal-ances (minimum and maximum Karma), and redistribution or resetting schemes remain to be explored. REFERENCES [1] A. Gautam and S. Mohan, “A review of research in multi-robot systems,” in 2012 IEEE 7th international conference on industrial and information systems (ICIIS) . IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–5. [2] J. Gao, Y. Li, X. Li, K. Yan, K. Lin, and X. Wu, “A review of graph-based multi-agent pathfinding solvers: From classical to beyond classical,” Knowledge-Based Systems , vol. 283, p. 111121, 2024. [3] R. Stern, “Multi-agent path finding–an overview,” Artificial intelli-gence: 5th RAAI summer School, dolgoprudny, Russia, july 4–7, 2019, tutorial lectures , pp. 96–115, 2019. [4] T. Yamauchi, Y. Miyashita, and T. Sugawara, “Path and action plan-ning in non-uniform environments for multi-agent pickup and delivery tasks,” in European Conference on Multi-Agent Systems . Springer, 2021, pp. 37–54. [5] J. Yu and S. M. LaValle, “Optimal multirobot path planning on graphs: Complete algorithms and effective heuristics,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 1163–1177, 2016. [6] E. Lam, P. Le Bodic, D. Harabor, and P. J. Stuckey, “Branch-and-cut-and-price for multi-agent path finding,” Computers & Operations Research , vol. 144, p. 105809, 2022. [7] P. E. Hart, N. J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael, “A formal basis for the heuristic determination of minimum cost paths,” IEEE transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 100–107, 1968. [8] G. Sharon, R. Stern, M. Goldenberg, and A. Felner, “The increasing cost tree search for optimal multi-agent pathfinding,” Artificial intel-ligence , vol. 195, pp. 470–495, 2013. [9] G. Sharon, R. Stern, A. Felner, and N. Sturtevant, “Meta-agent conflict-based search for optimal multi-agent path finding,” in Pro-ceedings of the International Symposium on Combinatorial Search ,vol. 3, no. 1, 2012, pp. 97–104. [10] H. Wang and M. Rubenstein, “Walk, stop, count, and swap: decen-tralized multi-agent path finding with theoretical guarantees,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1119–1126, 2020. [11] O. Purwin, R. D’Andrea, and J.-W. Lee, “Theory and implementation of path planning by negotiation for decentralized agents,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 422–436, 2008. [12] O. Amir, G. Sharon, and R. Stern, “Multi-agent pathfinding as a combinatorial auction,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 29, no. 1, 2015. [13] A. Maoudj and A. L. Christensen, “Decentralized multi-agent path finding in warehouse environments for fleets of mobile robots with limited communication range,” in International Conference on Swarm Intelligence . Springer, 2022, pp. 104–116. [14] U. Farhadi, H. Hess, A. Maoudj, and A. L. Christensen, “Evolution of path costs for efficient decentralized multi-agent pathfinding,” Swarm and Evolutionary Computation , vol. 93, p. 101833, 2025. [15] H. Inotsume, A. Aggarwal, R. Higa, and S. Nakadai, “Path negotiation for self-interested multirobot vehicles in shared space,” in 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 11 587–11 594. [16] C. I. Mavrogiannis and R. A. Knepper, “Decentralized multi-agent navigation planning with braids,” in Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics XII: Proceedings of the Twelfth Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics . Springer, 2020, pp. 880–895. [17] F. Ho, R. Geraldes, A. Gonc ¸alves, B. Rigault, B. Sportich, D. Kubo, M. Cavazza, and H. Prendinger, “Decentralized multi-agent path finding for uav traffic management,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 997–1008, 2020. [18] M. O. Keskin, F. Cant¨ urk, C. Eran, and R. Aydo˘ gan, “Decentralized multi-agent path finding framework and strategies based on automated negotiation,” Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , vol. 38, no. 1, p. 10, 2024. [19] A. R. Pritchett and A. Genton, “Negotiated decentralized aircraft conflict resolution,” IEEE transactions on intelligent transportation systems , vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 81–91, 2017. [20] V. R. Desaraju and J. P. How, “Decentralized path planning for multi-agent teams with complex constraints,” Autonomous Robots , vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 385–403, 2012. [21] R. Chandra, R. Maligi, A. Anantula, and J. Biswas, “Socialmapf: Optimal and efficient multi-agent path finding with strategic agents for social navigation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 3214–3221, 2023. [22] K. Riehl, A. Kouvelas, and M. A. Makridis, “Resource allocation with karma mechanisms—a review,” Economies , vol. 12, no. 8, p. 211, 2024. [23] V. Vishnumurthy, S. Chandrakumar, and E. G. Sirer, “Karma: A secure economic framework for peer-to-peer resource sharing,” in Workshop on Economics of Peer-to-peer Systems , vol. 35, no. 6, 2003. [24] H. W. Kuhn, “The hungarian method for the assignment problem,” 

Naval Research Logistics Quarterly , vol. 2, no. 1-2, pp. 83–97, 1955.