Title: Mosaic: An Extensible Framework for Composing Rule-Based and Learned Motion Planners

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.13853v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Apr 2026 01:09:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# Mosaic: An Extensible Framework for Composing Rule-Based and Learned Motion Planners 

Nick Le Large *1, Marlon Steiner *1, Lingguang Wang 1, Willi Poh 1,Jan-Hendrik Pauls 1, Ömer ¸ Sahin Ta¸ s 2 and Christoph Stiller 1

Abstract — Safe and explainable motion planning remains a central challenge in autonomous driving. While rule-based planners offer predictable and explainable behavior, they often fail to grasp the complexity and uncertainty of real-world traffic. Conversely, learned planners exhibit strong adaptability but suffer from reduced transparency and occasional safety violations. We introduce Mosaic , an extensible framework for structured decision-making that integrates both paradigms through arbitration graphs. By decoupling trajectory veri-fication and scoring from the generation of trajectories by individual planners, every decision becomes transparent and traceable. Trajectory verification at a higher level introduces redundancy between the planners, limiting emergency braking to the rare case where all planners fail to produce a valid trajectory. Through unified scoring and optimal trajectory selection, rule-based and learned planners with complementary strengths and weaknesses can be combined to yield the best of both worlds. In experimental evaluation on nuPlan, Mosaic 

achieves 95 .48 CLS-NR and 93 .98 CLS-R on the Val14 closed-loop benchmark, setting a new state of the art, while reducing at-fault collisions by 30% compared to either planner in isolation. On the interPlan benchmark, focused on highly interactive and difficult scenarios, Mosaic scores 54 .30 CLS-R, outperforming its best constituent planner by 23.3% — all without retraining or requiring additional data. The code is available at github.com/KIT-MRT/mosaic .

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Motion planning is a fundamental task for autonomous driving, responsible for generating safe, comfortable, and goal-directed trajectories in dynamic traffic environments. Achieving these objectives simultaneously remains a signif-icant challenge, as planners must adapt to diverse scenarios and remain explainable to ensure trust and verifiability. Existing motion planning approaches often fall into three main categories. Rule-based planners [1], [2] encode human-designed heuristics and constraints to produce predictable and explainable behaviors, but they can struggle to adapt to complex, unstructured, or previously unseen situations. Learning-based planners [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], on the other hand, demonstrate strong adaptability by leveraging data-driven models to capture the rich variability of real-world driving. However, their decision-making processes are not directly accessible, making it difficult to interpret or verify their outputs—a limitation that impedes their deployment in safety-critical systems. Lastly, hybrid approaches [2], [3],             

> * Authors have equal contribution.
> 1Institute of Measurement and Control Systems, Karl-sruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany

{firstname.lastname}@kit.edu 

> 2FZI Research Center for Information Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany

{lastname}@fzi.de 

[7] often combine learned planners with rules as a post-processing step. These approaches are mostly non-unified and tailored to the individual needs of a specific use case. rule-based learned 

A) Select best trajectory proposal B) Reject unsafe trajectory proposal 

Fig. 1: Mosaic combines complementary planners—e. g. rule-based and learned—within a structured and extensible framework. An arbitrator selects the best trajectory ( green )from candidate proposals ( blue ) while a shared verification layer rejects unsafe plans ( red ), enabling safe and explainable motion planning. In this work, we propose a unified framework for motion planning based on arbitration graphs (AGs) [8], [9], which are a structured decision-making mechanism that enables co-ordination among multiple behavior components. We call our framework Mosaic (see Fig. 1), as it combines heterogeneous planning approaches—much like the art form that assembles diverse pieces into a beautiful, coherent whole that is greater than the sum of its parts. While many state-of-the-art motion planners include some kind of post-processing or internal verification, we propose to structurally separate trajectory generation, the strengths of individual planning approaches, from trajectory verification and scoring. Building upon the arbitration concept, a cost arbitrator can evaluate the trajectory proposals of two or more complementary planners, e. g. a rule-based and a learned approach. Within our work, we wrap the learning-based 

> This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible.
> arXiv:2604.13853v1 [cs.RO] 15 Apr 2026

planner FlowDrive* [5] and the rule-based planner PDM-Closed [2] into the AG. Through unified verification, unsafe proposals that would lead to collisions can be rejected, while a fallback behavior— emergency braking—integrates naturally as a safety layer within the arbitration graph. A unified scoring function, inspired by the nuPlan metric, allows choosing the best pro-posal and thus combining the strengths of both approaches. Finally, the concept is extensible to additional motion planners and fallback layers. At the same time, it makes it clear which trajectory is chosen and why, i. e. due to cost or validity, enabling not only safe and optimal but also explainable decision-making for autonomous driving. Our contributions are as follows:  

> •

We introduce Mosaic , an extensible and explainable motion planning framework based on arbitration graphs that can integrate any planning algorithm—regardless of whether it is rule-based, learned, or hybrid—into a structured and extensible decision-making structure.  

> •

We decouple trajectory verification and scoring from the trajectory proposal, the strengths of individual planners, and embed them within the arbitration mechanism, enabling transparent, traceable, and adjustable decision-making at the behavior selection level. By rejecting invalid trajectories, we can reduce collisions by 30% compared to either planner in isolation. A unified scor-ing function, inspired by the nuPlan metric, allows for choosing the best trajectory proposal for any given situation, utilizing the complementary strengths of both planning approaches. This leads to a reduction in zero-score trajectories by 33% and outperforms or matches both individual planners in 11 of 14 scenario types.  

> •

In our experimental evaluation, we achieve state-of-the-art performance on both the nuPlan closed-loop non-reactive and reactive benchmarks (Val14 split [2]), out-performing all existing methods—rule-based, learned, and hybrid approaches—without retraining the underly-ing planners or requiring additional data. II. R ELATED WORK 

Autonomous driving requires reliable motion planning capable of handling diverse environments, uncertain interac-tions, and safety-critical decisions. This section reviews prior work on motion planning paradigms and on decision-making frameworks based on AGs, highlighting the need for a unified and interpretable integration mechanism across potentially heterogeneous motion planners. 

A. Motion Planning 

Motion planning for autonomous driving can be broadly categorized into rule-based , learning-based , and hybrid ap-proaches, with recent trends extending toward generative and language-based models. 

Rule-based methods rely on deterministic algorithms [1], handcrafted rules [2], or optimization-based formula-tions [10] to generate feasible and interpretable trajectories. While such methods offer transparency and predictability, they typically struggle in highly dynamic or unstructured environments. 

Learning-based approaches [3], [11], [12], [13] leverage neural architectures, often transformers, to learn motion plan-ning directly from data. These models exhibit adaptability and generalization across complex scenarios. In addition to imitation learning, reinforcement learning (RL) [6], [14], where agents learn driving policies through interaction and reward feedback, has been widely explored for motion planning. RL-based planners have shown promise in closed-loop control [6] and adaptation to rare scenarios, but often require extensive training and safety constraints. End-to-end approaches [15], [16], [17], [18] further integrate perception into the planning task, directly mapping sensor inputs to con-trol commands or trajectories. Recently, generative models such as diffusion- or flow-based planners [4], [5], [19], [20], [21] have emerged as powerful tools for producing diverse, realistic, and multimodal trajectory distributions. In parallel, language-driven methods explore the integration of natural language reasoning into driving systems, leveraging large language models (LLMs) [22], [23] and vision language models (VLMs) [24], [25] to explain semantic instructions and contextual cues. Despite their variety, most learning-based planning paradigms rely on hybrid methods [2], [7], [21] with a fixed internal decision process as post-processing to choose or refine the final trajectory. Note that there are also ap-proaches utilizing learned methods to refine the rule-based trajectory [2], [26]. When designing such a hybrid method, the decision logic is often ad hoc, non-modular, or hard to reproduce. This lack of a unified arbitration mechanism limits interpretability, extensibility, and safe integration of diverse planning modules. 

B. Decision-Making and Arbitration Graphs 

AGs provide a structured and explainable mechanism for hierarchical decision-making in autonomous systems [9]. Originally developed in the context of robotic soccer [8] and later used in autonomous driving [27], AGs draw inspira-tion from Brooks’ behavior-based subsumption, knowledge-based architectures like Belief-Desire-Intention, and object-oriented design principles [9]. In this framework, atomic behavior components represent fundamental abilities or behaviors that interpret the current situation and propose commands when their invocation con-ditions are met. Arbitrators organize these behaviors hierar-chically, filtering applicable options and selecting the most suitable one for execution using strategies such as priority-or cost-based selection. Compared to Behavior Trees, AGs explicitly encode preconditions and decision logic, leading to greater robustness and transparency. Recent developments extend AGs with domain-specific 

verification mechanisms that validate the safety and feasibil-ity of proposed commands before execution [9]. This enables the integration of experimental or learned behaviors without compromising system reliability, as unsafe or invalid outputs FlowDrive* PDM-Closed Composer Emergency Stop Mosaic Fig. 2: The proposed AG structure with 3 behavior components ( FlowDrive* , PDM-Closed , Emergency Stop ), a cost arbitrator Composer , and a priority arbitrator Mosaic .are intercepted in a verification step and mitigated through structured fallback layers. However, prior work has not explored the use of arbitration graphs on real-world data to evaluate the effectiveness of this approach on a widely recognized benchmark. In contrast, our work applies AGs to the large-scale autonomous driving benchmark nuPlan [28] and demonstrates that they can serve as an explainable decision structure capable of integrating heterogeneous planners within a single framework. Notably, AGs can serve not only as a method to com-bine multiple planners, but also to wrap a single planner, e.g., a learning-based one, into an explainable framework. Therefore, AGs are also suitable for replacing opaque, non-unified and specifically tailored decision-making, which is built on top of most of the current learning-based planning approaches [2], [3], [7], [21]. III. T HE MOSAIC FRAMEWORK 

The overall architecture of Mosaic is shown in Fig. 2. We make use of the explainable AG concept to compose two planners into a single architecture. Briefly, the framework can be understood as follows (from left to right, see Fig. 2):  

> •

FlowDrive* / PDM-Closed : These components cor-respond to behaviors in the AG framework, each propos-ing a trajectory given the current state of the world (see Section III-A).  

> •

Composer : This element is a cost arbitrator (see Sec-tion III-C) with an integrated verification step. For each behavior, the arbitrator verifies the proposed trajectory (see Section III-B); only verified trajectories are scored and considered for selection.  

> •

Emergency Stop : This behavior computes an emer-gency braking trajectory. As indicated by the safety buoy, this is a last resort fallback which does not need to pass verification [9].  

> •

Mosaic : This is the root arbitrator and it is de-signed as a priority arbitrator (see Section III-D). If the 

Composer arbitrator provides a valid trajectory, this trajectory is chosen, otherwise the Emergency Stop 

trajectory is applied. Throughout this paper, we use monospace font to refer to behavior components within the AG, which wrap the respective planner and include the modifications described in Section III-B. Plain text refers to the underlying planner itself as presented in the original publications. 

A. Trajectory Planners as Behaviors in the AG 

As Mosaic is planner-agnostic, we demonstrate it with two complementary planners in the AG. To combine the strengths of different motion planning paradigms, we choose a rule-based planner (PDM-Closed) and a learning-based planner (FlowDrive*). While FlowDrive [5] is the current open-source SOTA model, PDM-Closed achieves strong results as well on the nuPlan closed-loop benchmark. A rule-based and learning-based motion planner combination was already introduced through PDM-Hybrid (PDM-Closed + PDM-Open) [2], achieving slightly worse results in the closed-loop benchmark than PDM-Closed as a stand-alone. Contrary to this, we propose the use of a generic AG framework to fuse different planners into an explainable structure, naturally including trajectory verification and scoring, as well as fallback maneuvers. In the following, we provide a brief description of the utilized planners. 

1) Learning-based FlowDrive Planner: The FlowDrive model [5] utilizes rectified flow-matching [29], [30] for trajectory generation. This model addresses the common issue of data imbalance in driving datasets. While FlowDrive represents a purely learned approach based on a diffusion transformer architecture [31], the authors also provide an extension of the model using post-processing, resulting in a hybrid planning method (FlowDrive*). FlowDrive* features a moderated guidance mechanism that injects small perturba-tions during trajectory generation to increase maneuver diver-sity, such as overtaking or nudging. Evaluated on the nuPlan and interPlan [32] benchmarks, FlowDrive* achieves SOTA results among open-source methods, surpassing previous learning-based and hybrid methods. We utilize FlowDrive* in a behavior component of the AG presented in this work. 

2) Rule-based PDM-Closed Planner: The Predictive Driver Model Closed (PDM-Closed) [2] is a rule-based planner that extends the established Intelligent Driver Model (IDM). It is designed to maximize performance in the nuPlan closed-loop evaluation task. The model incorporates concepts from model predictive control, involving forecast-ing, proposal generation, simulation, scoring, and trajectory selection. It first uses a graph search to select a sequence of lanes (centerline) to follow. To handle diverse scenarios and address the trade-offs found when selecting a single target speed, PDM-Closed generates 15 trajectory proposals. These proposals are created by implementing IDM policies across five distinct target speeds (20% to 100% of the speed limit) at three lateral centerline offsets (±1 m and 0 m). The environment forecasting uses a simple constant velocity forecast for other dynamic agents. The trajectory proposals are simulated based on the expected closed-loop movement (using an LQR controller and a kinematic bicycle model). They are then scored based on metrics favoring traffic-rule compliance, progress, and comfort. An emergency brake is enforced if a collision is anticipated within two seconds. At publication time, PDM-Closed achieved SOTA closed-loop performance on nuPlan, while its open-loop performance is very poor. 

B. Behavior Verification 

Both PDM-Closed and FlowDrive* run an internal check and fall back to emergency braking if an at-fault collision is expected within 2.0 s . In this work, we turn off these internal checks and move them into the arbitration graph. As introduced in [9], verification is integrated directly into the arbitration algorithm: before an option is selected, the arbitrator performs a domain-specific verification of its pro-posed command. If the command fails the verification, it is discarded and the arbitrator proceeds to the next best option (see Fig. 3). This allows Mosaic to clearly communicate which tra-jectories are rejected and why, while falling back on the emergency stop maneuver only if both PDM-Closed and 

FlowDrive* propose unsafe options at the same time (see Section III-D). By centralizing verification within the arbitration graph, unsafe or experimental motion planners can be integrated without compromising the defined safety bounds. FlowDrive* PDM-Closed Composer Emergency Stop Mosaic 

Fig. 3: Behavior verification: One behavior component fails verification ( red ) and is rejected. The remaining behavior is selected. 

C. The Cost Arbitrator 

After filtering unsafe trajectories, the cost arbitrator (see 

Composer in Fig. 2) applies a cost function to select the best remaining option. Our scoring function is inspired by the nuPlan closed-loop evaluation metrics but, crucially, replaces their binary pass/fail decisions with continuous scores in 

[0 , 1] , giving the cost arbitrator fine-grained information to distinguish between candidate trajectories. Of course, unlike the nuPlan evaluation metrics, our scores have to be computed online using only historical observations and pre-dictions and cannot rely on ground truth data. We calculate a total score Stotal for each trajectory using a multiplicative gating approach: 

Stotal = Scoll · Sdriv · Sdir 

| {z }

> safety gate

· Gprog · Sperf . (1) The cost is Ctotal = −Stotal . All components are in [0 , 1] .TABLE I: Scoring function weights within the cost arbitrator. Parameter Value 

wcomfortable 2

wprogress 5

wttc 7Progress gate threshold τ 0.2 

Safety gate. The three multiplicative safety metrics act as a gate: if any is zero, the entire score collapses to zero, ensuring that risky trajectories are never preferred regardless of their performance. The collision score Scoll is computed as 1 minus the overlap ratio between the ego polygon and the colliding object, so that a grazing contact is penalized less than a full overlap. The drivable area score Sdriv returns the fraction of the simulated trajectory that remains within the drivable area. The driving direction score Sdir penalizes oncoming-traffic travel based on the cumulative distance driven against traffic. 

Progress gate. A soft gate Gprog = min( progress /τ, 1) 

penalizes standstill trajectories, where progress is the ego’s displacement along the route centerline normalized by the expected distance given the current speed. 

Performance score. The performance score Sperf is a weighted average of progress, time-to-collision (TTC), and comfort, with weights listed in Table I. The TTC score is the predicted time to the earliest collision, clamped to a 

3 s horizon and normalized to [0 , 1] , yielding a continuous penalty that increases as a collision approaches. The comfort score evaluates acceleration and jerk constraints along the trajectory. 

D. Priority Arbitrator to Integrate Fallback Layer FlowDrive* PDM-Closed Composer Emergency Stop Mosaic 

Fig. 4: Emergency fallback: Both behavior components fail verification. The Composer becomes inapplicable, and the priority arbitrator falls back to Emergency Stop .As the last step in our AG design, we use a priority arbitrator ( Mosaic in Fig. 2), which selects valid options top-down. A trajectory from the cost arbitrator is always preferred over the Emergency Stop behavior. If neither 

FlowDrive* nor PDM-Closed passes verification, the 

Composer arbitrator becomes inapplicable and the priority arbitrator falls back to the Emergency Stop behavior (see Fig. 4). Following [9], the emergency stop serves as the last resort fallback and does not need to pass verification. It is implemented as a straight-line deceleration, ensuring a simple and deterministic action. Compared to the emergency stop planner utilized both in FlowDrive* and PDM-Closed, we increased the deceleration from 4.05 m s −2 to 8.0 m s −2.TABLE II: Comparison on the nuPlan Val14 and interPlan evaluation splits. CLS-NR and CLS-R denote the score for the closed-loop non-reactive and closed-loop reactive benchmark, respectively. Best results per evaluation type and per column are in bold , second-best are underlined. †Closed-source model. 

Type Planner Val14 interPlan 

CLS-NR ↑ CLS-R ↑ CLS-R ↑

Expert Log-replay 93.53 80.32 14.76 Learning-based PDM-Open [2] 53.53 54.24 25.02 Diffusion Planner [21] 89.87 82.38 24.71 FlowDrive [5] 91.21 85.37 36.96 GIGAFLOW † [6] - 93.8 -Rule-based & Hybrid IDM [1] 75.60 77.33 31.20 PDM-Closed [2] 92.84 92.12 41.23 PDM-Hybrid [2] 92.77 92.11 41.61 Diffusion Planner w/ refine. [21] 94.26 92.90 -FlowDrive* [5] 94.81 92.96 44.05 Mosaic (ours) 95.48 93.98 54.30 

IV. E VALUATION ON NU PLAN 

We evaluate our proposed Mosaic framework on the nuPlan closed-loop benchmark and the interPlan benchmark, comparing against a wide range of motion planners, includ-ing the current learned SOTA method GIGAFLOW [6]. 

A. nuPlan Closed-loop Benchmark 

Following the evaluation established by [2], we evaluate the Val14 split of the nuPlan benchmark, which comprises 

1118 scenarios across 14 scenario types. The closed-loop benchmark computes two scores (CLS): CLS-NR (non-reactive) and CLS-R (reactive), which refer to the move-ment of other agents. The final score accounts for at-fault collisions, drivable area compliance, driving direction compliance, progress made, time to collision, speed limit compliance, ego progress along the expert’s route ratio, and comfort. We additionally evaluate on the interPlan bench-mark [32], a publicly available nuPlan extension focused on highly interactive and difficult scenarios. 

B. Baselines 

We compare against a comprehensive set of learned, rule-based, and hybrid planning methods. In the category of purely learned planners, the current open-source SOTA is FlowDrive [5], which utilizes the generative flow matching principle and is trained with a scenario sampling strat-egy that leads to more balanced data. The closed-source GIGAFLOW [6] model is also a learned planner, trained purely in self-play simulation within a multi-agent rein-forcement learning setting without seeing any data from the dataset. In the category of hybrid methods, FlowDrive* with moderated guidance and a trajectory selection process leads the benchmark of open-source models. 

C. Quantitative Results 

Table II summarizes the results on the Val14 benchmark. Among purely learning-based planners, diffusion-based [21] and flow-matching [5] models achieve the highest closed-loop scores, surpassing earlier methods [3], [11]. However, a consistent trend can be observed across all entries: when a rule-based component is integrated, forming a hybrid system, the resulting performance increases substantially [3], [5], [21]. This highlights the crucial role of rule-based reasoning in enhancing the stability and safety of data-driven planners. Consequently, hybrid planning strategies currently represent the most effective class of motion planners on nuPlan. Our proposed Mosaic framework achieves 95 .48 CLS-NR and 93 .98 CLS-R, surpassing all baselines and setting a new SOTA on the nuPlan closed-loop non-reactive as well as the closed-loop reactive benchmarks. On the interPlan benchmark, Mosaic achieves 54 .30 

CLS-R, outperforming its components FlowDrive* by 23 .3 % 

resp. PDM-Closed by 31 .7 % .These results demonstrate that the proposed AG frame-work is able to compose heterogeneous motion planners as an alternative to ad hoc rule-based heuristics, while preserving explainability. 

D. Computational Overhead 

We compare the total simulation time of each configu-ration across the full Val14 benchmark on the same hard-ware. Running FlowDrive* alone takes 53 .8 min , while 

PDM-Closed alone completes in 29 .1 min . The full Mosaic 

framework, which evaluates both planners, scores, and veri-fies their trajectories, completes in 60 .6 min — an increase of only 13 % over FlowDrive* alone. Disabling the verifica-tion module saves less than 3 % of computation time, indicat-ing that the safety checks add negligible overhead. Crucially, 

FlowDrive* runs on the GPU whereas PDM-Closed 

and all arbitration logic run entirely on the CPU, so the two planners occupy different compute resources. In our benchmark they are evaluated sequentially, but because they are independent they can be executed in parallel, overlapping TABLE III: Ablation study on the Val14 CLS-R benchmark. 

Coll. denotes at-fault collision count (with (number) being the collisions of the respective planner as stand-alone). Zero 

denotes scenarios with zero overall score. EB denotes the percentage of time steps in which an emergency brake is triggered.                            

> Configuration Per Scenario Per Step CLS-R ↑Coll. ↓Zero ↓EB ↓
> Mosaic (full) 93.98 14 20 0.08
> w/o verif. 92.82 35 38 -
> FlowDrive* only 92.96 18 (20) 30 0.29
> PDM-Closed only 92.15 17 (20) 33 0.30

CPU and GPU work so that the added wall-clock latency of the second planner approaches zero. Moreover, verifica-tion and emergency-stop logic were already part of each individual planner. Mosaic merely consolidates them into a shared module, adding no new computation. The only true overhead is therefore the lightweight trajectory scoring, while the fallback mechanism operates lazily and only queries the 

Emergency Stop component if no verified trajectory is available. 

E. Ablation Studies 

To isolate the contribution of each component, we conduct three ablation experiments on the CLS-R benchmark: (1) re-moving the verification module while keeping both planners (w/o verif. ), (2) using only FlowDrive* with verification and emergency stop, and (3) using only PDM-Closed with verification and emergency stop. Results are summarized in Table III. 

1) Component Contributions: Each AG component con-tributes measurably to the final result. Removing the verifi-cation module more than doubles the number of at-fault col-lisions from 14 to 35, confirming that trajectory verification is essential for safety. Using only a single planner with the AG framework further degrades both score and robustness. Notably, Mosaic achieves fewer collisions (14) than either single-planner configuration (18 for FlowDrive* , 17 for 

PDM-Closed ), demonstrating that the AG can leverage the safer trajectory across planners on a per-timestep basis. For reference, both FlowDrive* and PDM-Closed produce 20 at-fault collisions each in their original implementations with their own internal verifiers. 

2) Behavior Selection Distribution: The cost arbitrator se-lects FlowDrive* as the higher-scoring behavior in 18 .7 % 

of time steps and PDM-Closed in 28 .8 % . In the remaining 

52 .5 % , both behaviors score equally and the learning-based planner is chosen by design (Fig. 5). As shown in Table IV, the two planners exhibit comple-mentary strengths: each one leads in roughly half of the 14 scenario types, with no single planner dominating across the board. Out of the 14 scenario types, Mosaic outperforms both single-planner ablations in 9 and ties in 2 more, confirming that the cost arbitrator successfully leverages the complementarity between planners. FlowDrive* 18.7% PDM-Closed 28.8% Tied 52.5% 

Fig. 5: Behavior selection distribution of the cost arbitrator across all time steps on the Val14 CLS-R benchmark. TABLE IV: Per-scenario-type CLS-R scores. Best result per row in bold , second-best underlined. Rows sorted by Mosaic 

score.                                                 

> Scenario type ( n)PDM-Cl. FlowDrive* Mosaic Near mult. vehicles (85) 89.37 87.02 89.84
> Start. left turn (100) 89.10 88.85 89.98
> High lat. accel. (96) 87.05 91.44 92.28
> Follow. w/ lead (15) 94.52 95.10 92.74 Changing lane (70) 94.33 91.27 92.79 Trav. pickup/dropoff (99) 91.59 91.92 93.12
> Start. right turn (98) 89.07 94.49 93.58 Low mag. speed (100) 90.75 91.86 93.99
> Start. straight TL int. (98) 91.87 93.68 94.41
> Wait. for pedestrian (53) 92.71 92.76 95.94
> Stationary in traffic (98) 95.87 95.77 96.20
> High mag. speed (99) 94.51 95.91 96.27
> Stopping w/ lead (93) 98.96 98.24 98.96
> Behind long vehicle (14) 100.00 99.11 100.00
> Overall (1118) 92.15 92.96 93.98

3) Behavior Verification: As described in Section III-B, a trajectory is rejected when an at-fault collision is predicted. If neither FlowDrive* nor PDM-Closed produces a veri-fied trajectory, the Emergency Stop behavior is executed. As shown in Table III, PDM-Closed fails verification in 

0.30 % and FlowDrive* in 0.29 % of time steps. At least one behavior fails verification in 0.50 % of time steps, while both fail simultaneously in just 0.08 % (141 out of 166 806 

time steps). The low frequency of emergency stops illustrates the key benefit of the AG: in most cases where one planner proposes an unsafe trajectory, the other provides a valid alternative, preventing unnecessary interventions. V. C ONCLUSIONS 

We presented Mosaic , a modular framework that uses arbi-tration graphs to fuse heterogeneous motion planners into an extensible, explainable decision-making structure with built-in verification and fallback mechanisms. By combining the rule-based PDM-Closed and the learning-based FlowDrive* planner, Mosaic sets a new state of the art on the nuPlan Val14 closed-loop benchmarks with 95 .48 CLS-NR and 

93 .98 CLS-R, while reducing at-fault collisions to just 14 — fewer than either planner in isolation. On the interPlan benchmark, Mosaic scores 54 .30 CLS-R, outperforming its best constituent planner by 23 .3 % — all without retraining either planner or requiring additional training data. Our abla-tion study shows that each framework component contributes to the result: embedding verification within the AG struc-ture, rather than inside each planner, makes every rejection decision traceable. It allows the system to gracefully fall back to the alternative planner before engaging an emergency stop — reducing at-fault collisions while maintaining full transparency over the decision process. The two planners exhibit complementary strengths across scenario types, and their combination outperforms either planner in isolation. Because the framework treats planners as black-box behavior components, it generalizes to any planner and can evolve alongside future advances in both rule-based and learning-based motion planning. REFERENCES [1] M. Treiber, A. Hennecke, and D. Helbing, “Congested Traffic States in Empirical Observations and Microscopic Simulations,” Physical Review E , 2000. [2] D. Dauner, M. Hallgarten, A. Geiger, and K. Chitta, “Parting with Misconceptions about Learning-based Vehicle Motion Planning,” in 

CoRL , 2023. [3] J. Cheng, Y. Chen, and Q. Chen, “PLUTO: Pushing the Limit of Imitation Learning-based Planning for Autonomous Driving,” 

arXiv:2404.14327 , 2024. [4] B. Liao, S. Chen, H. Yin, B. Jiang, C. Wang, S. Yan, et al., “Dif-fusiondrive: Truncated diffusion model for end-to-end autonomous driving,” in CVPR , 2025. [5] L. Wang, Ö. ¸ S. Ta¸ s, M. Steiner, and C. Stiller, “Flowdrive: Moderated flow matching with data balancing for trajectory planning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21961 , 2025. [6] M. Cusumano-Towner, D. Hafner, A. Hertzberg, B. Huval, A. Pe-trenko, E. Vinitsky, et al., “Robust autonomy emerges from self-play,” in ICML , 2025. [7] Z. Huang, H. Liu, and C. Lv, “GameFormer: Game-theoretic Mod-eling and Learning of Transformer-based Interactive Prediction and Planning for Autonomous Driving,” in ICCV , 2023. [8] M. Lauer, R. Hafner, S. Lange, and M. Riedmiller, “Cognitive concepts in autonomous soccer playing robots,” Cognitive Systems Research , 2010. [9] P. Spieker, N. Le Large, and M. Lauer, “Better safe than sorry: En-hancing arbitration graphs for safe and robust autonomous decision-making,” in IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC) , 2025. [10] Ö. ¸ S. Ta¸ s, P. H. Brusius, and C. Stiller, “Decision-theoretic MPC: Motion Planning with Weighted Maneuver Preferences Under Un-certainty,” arXiv:2310.17963 , 2023. [11] J. Cheng, Y. Chen, X. Mei, B. Yang, B. Li, and M. Liu, “Rethinking imitation-based planners for autonomous driving,” in ICRA , 2024. [12] Z. Zhou, H. Haibo, X. Chen, J. Wang, N. Guan, K. Wu, et al., “Behaviorgpt: Smart agent simulation for autonomous driving with next-patch prediction,” NeurIPS , 2024. [13] W. Wu, X. Feng, Z. Gao, and Y. Kan, “Smart: Scalable multi-agent real-time motion generation via next-token prediction,” NeurIPS ,2024. [14] F. Konstantinidis, M. Sackmann, U. Hofmann, and C. Stiller, “Graph-Based Adversarial Imitation Learning for Predicting Human Driving Behavior,” in IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) , 2024. [15] P. Li and D. Cui, “Navigation-Guided Sparse Scene Representation for End-to-End Autonomous Driving,” arXiv:2409.18341 , 2025. [16] C. Yuan, Z. Zhang, J. Sun, S. Sun, Z. Huang, C. D. W. Lee, et al., “DRAMA: An Efficient End-to-end Motion Planner for Autonomous Driving with Mamba,” arXiv:2408.03601 , 2024. [17] Y. Chen, Y. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “Drivinggpt: Unifying driving world modeling and planning with multi-modal autoregressive trans-formers,” in CVPR , 2025. [18] H. Nishimura, J. Mercat, B. Wulfe, R. T. McAllister, and A. Gaidon, “RAP: Risk-Aware Prediction for Robust Planning,” in CoRL , 2023. [19] Z. Huang, X. Weng, M. Igl, Y. Chen, Y. Cao, B. Ivanovic, et al., “Gen-drive: Enhancing diffusion generative driving policies with reward modeling and reinforcement learning fine-tuning,” in ICRA ,2025. [20] Y. Hu, S. Chai, Z. Yang, J. Qian, K. Li, W. Shao, et al., “Solving motion planning tasks with a scalable generative model,” in ECCV ,2024. [21] Y. Zheng, R. Liang, K. ZHENG, J. Zheng, L. Mao, J. Li, et al., “Diffusion-based planning for autonomous driving with flexible guidance,” in ICLR , 2025. [22] Y. Chen, Z.-h. Ding, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, and S. Liu, “Asyn-chronous large language model enhanced planner for autonomous driving,” in ECCV , 2024. [23] B. Li, Y. Wang, J. Mao, B. Ivanovic, S. Veer, K. Leung, et al., “Driving everywhere with large language model policy adaptation,” in CVPR , 2024. [24] C. Sima, K. Renz, K. Chitta, L. Chen, H. Zhang, C. Xie, et al., “Drivelm: Driving with graph visual question answering,” in ECCV ,2024. [25] C. Pan, B. Yaman, T. Nesti, A. Mallik, A. G. Allievi, S. Velipasalar, et al., “Vlp: Vision language planning for autonomous driving,” in 

CVPR , 2024. [26] J. Fischer, M. Steiner, Ö. ¸ S. Ta¸ s, and C. Stiller, “Safety reinforced model predictive control (srmpc): Improving mpc with reinforcement learning for motion planning in autonomous driving,” in ITSC , 2023. [27] P. F. Orzechowski, C. Burger, and M. Lauer, “Decision-making for automated vehicles using a hierarchical behavior-based arbitration scheme,” in IV , 2020. [28] H. Caesar, J. Kabzan, K. S. Tan, W. K. Fong, E. Wolff, A. Lang, et al., “Nuplan: A closed-loop ml-based planning benchmark for autonomous vehicles,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11810 , 2021. [29] Y. Lipman, R. T. Chen, H. Ben-Hamu, M. Nickel, and M. Le, “Flow matching for generative modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747 , 2022. [30] X. Liu, C. Gong, and Q. Liu, “Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03003 , 2022. [31] W. Peebles and S. Xie, “Scalable diffusion models with transform-ers,” in CVPR , 2023. [32] M. Hallgarten, J. Zapata, M. Stoll, K. Renz, and A. Zell, “Can vehicle motion planning generalize to realistic long-tail scenarios?” In IROS ,2024.