Arborist: Algorithm-Hardware Co-Design for Fast
and Efficient Motion Planning
Yaotian Liu∗, Lingyi Huang†, Zishen Wan‡, Bo Yuan†, Cheng Tan∗§, and Jeff (Jun) Zhang∗
∗Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
†Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA
‡Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
§Google, Mountain View, CA, USA
yaotian_liu@asu.edu, lingyi.huang@rutgers.edu, zishen.wan@columbia.edu,
bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu, chengtan@google.com, jeffzhang@asu.edu
Abstract—Real-time motion planning must execute under strict
latency and energy constraints on resource-limited platforms.
This paper presents Arborist, an algorithm–hardware co-design
framework that accelerates Fast Marching Tree (FMT*) motion
planning through synergistic algorithmic and architectural inno-
vations. At the algorithm level, Arborist introduces safe multi-
tree expansion with global competition management and cross-
tree optimality checking to expose inter-tree parallelism while
preserving path quality. At the architecture level, our proposed
ArboristAccel integrates an Arborist Toolbox that provides
hardware support for inter-tree parallelism; a KD-tree Subsys-
tem for high-throughput near-neighbor search; a Parallel-Query
Retrieval module that balances multi-bank memory accesses
to alleviate system-level memory bandwidth bottlenecks; and a
Look-ahead Planning Engine that exploits intra-tree parallelism
while preserving path quality by in-order commit. Synthesized in
16 nm and operating at 500 MHz, ArboristAccel sustains more
than 103× speedup over CPU across all workloads (peaking at
2.8 × 103× on 2D-Maze), and delivers geomean improvements
of 8.8× speedup, 4.6× area efficiency, and 3.1× power effi-
ciency over an FMT* ASIC baseline. The corresponding factors
relative to a state-of-the-art RRT*-based MOPED accelerator
are 8.6×/1.0×/1.8×, at comparable path cost. To the best of
our knowledge, ArboristAccel is the first dedicated hardware
accelerator for FMT*-based motion planning.
Index
Terms—motion
planning,
hardware
acceleration,
algorithm–hardware co-design, Fast Marching Tree, specialized
architecture
I. Introduction
Motion planning is a critical workload in robotics [1], [2],
autonomous systems [3], [4], embodied AI [5]–[8], humanoid
control [9], and manufacturing [10], enabling real-time decision
making in high-dimensional and unknown environments. Mo-
tion planning seeks to compute a feasible and efficient trajectory
from a start configuration to a goal configuration while avoiding
collisions with obstacles. High-quality, low-latency planning is
essential for reliable robotic navigation and safe autonomous
operation.
However, integrating state-of-the-art motion planning into
real systems remains challenging. First, achieving high success
rates and path quality in high-dimensional configuration spaces
requires exploring many sampled nodes, incurring substantial
computational overhead. Second, real-time planning must exe-
cute locally: although cloud offloading can accelerate computa-
tion [11], unpredictable network latency makes it unsuitable for
safety-critical applications such as self-driving vehicles or agile
drones [8], [12]. Third, stringent device-level constraints (such
as limited battery capacity and compact form factors) restrict
on-device computational resources [13], further exacerbating
the challenge.
Among state-of-the-art motion-planning solutions, sampling-
based planners [14]–[18] have emerged as promising candidates
for real-time deployment because they explore complex, high-
dimensional configuration spaces efficiently and include asymp-
totically optimal variants. In particular, Fast Marching Tree
(FMT*)-based motion planning [18]–[22] stands out because
(1) its dynamic-programming wavefront expansion yields near-
optimal path quality [14], and (2) its lazy collision checking
significantly reduces collision-test overhead. Unfortunately,
despite these algorithmic advantages, FMT*-powered motion
planners still suffer from the high computational cost of
searching the nearest neighbors in high-dimensional real-world
environments [23].
In parallel, hardware acceleration has emerged as a promis-
ing approach to real-time motion planning. For instance,
RACOD [24] massively parallelizes collision checks and in-
troduces speculative exploration mechanisms that effectively
accelerate search-based motion planners such as A* [25].
MOPED [26] uses custom hardware with restructured neighbor-
search and speculative pipelines for sampling-based Rapidly-
exploring Random Trees (RRT*) [17], improving motion-
planning throughput and energy efficiency in unknown environ-
ments. Nevertheless, existing hardware solutions overlook the
algorithmic advantages of FMT*-based motion planning, moti-
vating approaches that can deliver high real-time performance
while maintaining path quality.
This work presents Arborist, a novel algorithm-hardware
co-design framework for hardware-accelerated parallel FMT*
execution. Importantly, ArboristAccel is not hard-wired to a
single planner: by separating a fixed execution substrate from a
reconfigurable control layer, the same hardware retargets across
the FMT*-family without redesigning the underlying datapath.
Across 2D/3D (city, maze, drone) and high-DoF (5D/7D arm)
benchmarks, ArboristAccel delivers geomean improvements
of 8.8× speedup, 4.6× area efficiency, and 3.1× power efficiency
arXiv:2609.13420v1  [cs.AR]  11 Sep 2026


over an FMT* ASIC baseline. The corresponding factors relative
to a state-of-the-art RRT*-based MOPED accelerator [26] are
8.6×/1.0×/1.8×, at comparable path cost.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We present ArboristAccel, the first dedicated hardware
accelerator for FMT*-based motion planning, targeting the
dominant bottlenecks in nearest-neighbor search, tree expan-
sion, and speculative look-ahead planning.
• We develop the Arborist algorithm, a multi-FMT* mo-
tion planner whose tree splitting, cross-tree overriding,
and competition management expose inter-tree parallelism
while preserving path optimality via an admissible cross-tree
optimality check.
• We design the ArboristAccel architecture: an Arborist
Toolbox for inter-tree control, a KD-tree Subsystem with
an exactly balanced constructor for dynamic replanning, a
Parallel-Query Retrieval engine balancing multi-bank mem-
ory accesses, and a Look-ahead Planning Engine for intra-tree
speculation with in-order commit.
• ArboristAccel is a programmable substrate for the FMT*
family: reconfiguring only the control layer adapts the datap-
ath to FMT*, BFMT*, IAFMT*, and IABFMT*, achieving a
294.6× geometric-mean CPU speedup. The on-chip construc-
tor adds 3.3–8.0× end-to-end speedup over CPU-side tree
reconstruction for the iterative IAFMT*/IABFMT* variants
under dynamic replanning.
• Our evaluation shows that Arborist preserves path quality
and sustains more than 103× CPU speedup across all work-
loads, with geomean 8.8×/4.6×/3.1× speedup/area/power
gains over an FMT* ASIC baseline. The corresponding
factors relative to the RRT*-based MOPED accelerator [26]
are 8.6×/1.0×/1.8×.
II. Background and Motivation
This section reviews motion-planning algorithms and prior
hardware accelerators.
A. Motion Planning
Motion planning is the computational process of determining
a robot’s trajectory from an initial to a goal configuration while
avoiding obstacles in the environment. It involves computing a
feasible, collision-free path that satisfies geometric, kinematic,
and dynamic constraints [27]. Classical formulations include ge-
ometric path planning (e.g., the “piano mover’s problem”) [28],
kinodynamic planning that accounts for system dynamics and
actuation limits [29], and optimal motion planning, which seeks
to minimize a cost functional such as path length or energy
consumption [17]. Over the past four decades, the field has
evolved through several major paradigms — from early com-
binatorial approaches with exponential-time guarantees [30], to
potential field methods [31], and, more recently, to sampling-
based motion planning (SBMP) algorithms [14], which scale
more efficiently to high-dimensional configuration spaces.
SBMP
algorithms
such
as
Probabilistic
Roadmaps
(PRM) [15] and Rapidly-exploring Random Trees (RRT) [16]
generate feasible solutions by incrementally exploring the
𝑉!"#$
(wavefront)
𝑉%&!'#(
(settled)
Obstacles
𝑉)$*+'+,#(
1
2
3
4
6
7
5
(a)
𝑟
1
2
3
4
6
7
5
(b)
1
2
3
4
6
7
5
(c)
Fig. 1.
Example of one FMT* iteration. (a) Select the minimum-cost node
in 𝑉𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛(i.e., node 1 ) and identify its unvisited neighbors within radius 𝑟
(nodes 4 and 5 ). (b) For each unvisited neighbor, consider candidate parents
in 𝑉𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛within radius 𝑟(dashed lines), and minimize the parent’s cost-to-
come plus the connecting edge cost ( 4 →1 and 5 →2 , highlighted by red
dashed lines). (c) Perform collision checking only for these selected connections
and add the valid edges (only 5 →2 succeeds). Finally, move 1 to 𝑉𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑
and insert 5 into 𝑉𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛. For clarity, we will refer to 𝑉closed as “settled points”
and 𝑉open as “wavefront points” in the rest of the paper.
configuration space through random sampling. These methods
provide probabilistic completeness, ensuring eventual success
if a feasible path does exist. Subsequent advancements in-
troduced asymptotically optimal variants such as PRM* [17]
and RRT* [17], which converge toward cost-optimal solutions
as the number of samples increases. Building on this line of
work, the Fast Marching Tree (FMT*) algorithm [18] integrates
dynamic programming principles with sampling-based search to
achieve faster convergence and fewer collision checks, offering
improved scalability in complex environments. Today, these
algorithms underpin a wide range of applications, including
robotic manipulation [32], autonomous driving [33], and multi-
robot coordination [34], where efficient and reliable planning is
essential for real-time operation.
B. Fast Marching Tree (FMT*) Family
The Fast Marching Tree (FMT*) algorithm [18] grows a
single tree via a lazy dynamic-programming recursion over an
implicit random geometric graph, expanding outward in cost-to-
come “wavefront” (akin to Fast Marching) while constructing
and searching the graph simultaneously. It is asymptotically
optimal under standard robustness assumptions with a proven
convergence-rate bound, and runs in expected 𝑂(𝑛log 𝑛) time
with 𝑂(𝑛) collision checks.
Since its introduction, FMT* has inspired a broad range
of derivative algorithms that extend its wavefront expansion
principle to various settings. Bidirectional FMT* (BFMT*) [19]
grows two trees simultaneously from the start and goal to
accelerate convergence. Group Marching Tree (GMT*) [20]
extends FMT* to parallel architectures by employing group
updates and approximate dynamic programming, enabling effi-
cient execution on GPUs. Informed Anytime Fast Marching Tree
(IAFMT*) [21] augments FMT* with an anytime mechanism
that alternates incremental search and dynamic optimal search
to keep improving a found path. Kino-FMT* [35] applies
FMT* to generic kinodynamic problems by handling directed
connections and two-point BVP/steering. Many of these FMT*-
based planners have been integrated into the Open Motion
Planning Library (OMPL) [36] as standard planning methods,


Fig. 2.
(a) Comparison of sampling-based motion planners. Shaded regions
indicate minimum–maximum ranges; percentages indicate success rates below
100%. (b) Runtime breakdown. Unlike RRT*, FMT* spends most of its runtime
on neighbor search. We select PRM* [17] as a classic baseline, RRT* [17] as a
ubiquitous single-query tree with rewiring, BIT* [37] as the seminal informed-
tree planner, and FMT* [18] as the seminal wavefront dynamic-programming
planner. Success rates are measured over 10 runs. FMT* uses 5k–30k samples;
the other planners use time limits of 5–160 s. Experiments use OMPL [36] on
an AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3960X CPU at 3.8 GHz.
underscoring the prominence of FMT* as a foundational
algorithm in modern motion planning.
Why FMT*? Figure 1 illustrates one iteration of FMT*. It offers
two key advantages: (i) it reduces reliance on costly collision
checks by adopting lazy edge validation, deferring collision
evaluation until necessary, and (ii) each minimum-cost frontier
expansion can connect multiple unvisited neighbors. As a result,
FMT* achieves faster convergence toward high-quality solutions
than RRT* and PRM*, particularly in high-dimensional or
cluttered environments. Empirical evaluations [14] demonstrate
that FMT* consistently delivers competitive success rates and
lower path costs across diverse planning benchmarks.
Our profiling in Figure 2(a) shows that FMT* achieves
the shortest average path length with the lowest computation
time among alternative sampling-based planners, confirming
that it offers an excellent trade-off between path quality and
runtime. Figure 2(b) breaks down the runtime and shows that
FMT* spends only a small fraction of its work on collision
checking, whereas other planners are dominated by this cost.
Since collision checking is well known to be the primary
bottleneck in sampling-based motion planning [24], [38]–[40],
an algorithm that structurally minimizes collision checks is
particularly attractive for on-device accelerators. Thus, FMT*
not only provides strong algorithmic performance, but also a
more hardware-friendly cost profile for our accelerator design.
C. Motivation for Hardware-accelerated Motion Planning
Real-time, Power, and End-to-End Latency Requirements.
Real-time responsiveness at sub-second, often millisecond,
scales is essential for safe deployment in safety-critical en-
vironments [41]: industrial robots must react to obstacles or
human motion within tightly bounded windows, making worst-
case timing a first-class constraint. Concretely, agile aerial
robots run MPCC controllers at 100 Hz with online replanning
every step [42], and topological replanning is constrained to
5–7 ms of search plus 10 ms of optimization [41]. At the same
time, battery-powered platforms such as nano-drones (10 cm,
27 g) [43] impose stringent power and form-factor budgets.
Because total response latency composes perception, planning,
and control, delays in any stage propagate through the closed
loop and degrade overall responsiveness [44], an especially
dangerous failure mode in safety-critical scenarios.
Motion Planning is the Computational Bottleneck. With
perception and control already heavily optimized [5], [45],
motion planning has emerged as the dominant bottleneck
of perception–planning–control pipelines [6], [7]. As shown
in Figure 2, even optimized planners take tens of seconds
on 6-DoF scenes; GPU implementations still need tens of
seconds for a Kuka 7-DoF arm [46]; on a NVIDIA Jetson
TX-2, planning runs 3.5–8× slower than perception+control
on MAVBench workloads [47]; and ARM Cortex-class CPUs
spend ∼5 s and ∼1 W per indoor-navigation query, while typical
mobile micro-robots demand 10× lower power and 100× higher
throughput [48]. These large gaps motivate specialized hardware
for motion planning.
Hardware Acceleration Challenges. From a computational
perspective, SBMP (such as FMT*) is fundamentally different
from conventional AI or vision workloads: it features irregular,
data-dependent computation with poor spatial/temporal locality
and high control-flow divergence, while runtime is dominated
by latency-variable nearest-neighbor and collision queries over
large spatial structures. Moreover, its parallelism is largely
unstructured because the active node set evolves dynamically,
preventing efficient load balancing on GPUs.
Together, these characteristics render motion planning a
highly irregular, memory-intensive, and latency-sensitive work-
load, demanding novel architectural mechanisms that can effi-
ciently handle data-dependent computation, dynamic memory
access, and real-time responsiveness. This paper presents Ar-
borist, an algorithm-hardware co-design framework integrated
with a set of novel optimizations (as shown in Figure 3) for fast
and efficient FMT* motion planning accelerator design.
III. Arborist Algorithm
This section introduces the Arborist algorithm framework,
which exploits environmental context to unlock novel paral-
lelism opportunities in the otherwise sequential FMT* algo-
rithm without sacrificing path quality. As illustrated in Figure 3,
baseline FMT* is inherently sequential due to its recursive
tree traversal, while Arborist enables both inter-tree (safe
tree-splitting) and intra-tree (look-ahead planning) parallelism,
yielding faster computation at identical path quality.
An overview of the Arborist algorithm framework is shown
in Figure 4; the four steps are detailed in the following
subsections.


Pending
DONE!
?
Start
Target
Path Found
Points from different trees
(a) Baseline FMT*
(b) Arborist FMT*
Baseline 
FMT*
Neighbor Search
C.D. Aux.
+ O.2
KD-tree
Subsys.
5 x
+ O.3
Parallel Query
Retrieval
+ O.4
Look-ahead
Planning
+ O.1
Arborist 
Toolbox
2 x
4 ~ 6 x 
2.5 ~ 4 x 
…
Time
Fig. 3. Arborist vs. baseline FMT*. Baseline FMT* is inherently sequential due
to its dynamic-programming wavefront recursion, leaving compute resources
underutilized. Arborist unlocks both inter-tree parallelism (via safe tree-
splitting with global competition management) and intra-tree parallelism (via
look-ahead planning), achieving substantially faster computation at identical
path quality.
A. Step 1: Tree Splitting
Intuition. Sampling nodes in the FMT* propagating wavefront
(i.e., 𝑉open in Figure 1) are naturally partitioned into clusters
by environmental contexts such as obstacles. Arborist leverages
this property to enable opportunities for simultaneous multi-tree
expansion (i.e., inter-tree parallelism).
As shown in Figure 4 (a) (Step 1), Arborist exploits
this clustering behavior in 𝑉open to enable parallel multi-
tree growth. A straightforward approach would construct the
minimum spanning tree (MST) [49] of sampled nodes and
detect large edge outliers as natural cluster boundaries. However,
this method incurs 𝑂(𝑛2𝐷) complexity for pairwise distance
computation and an additional 𝑂(𝑛2) for MST construction,
making it unsuitable for real-time planning. Therefore, in our
approach, for each state dimension 𝑑, it projects nodes onto
coordinate 𝑥[𝑑], sorts the projected values (𝑂(𝑛log 𝑛)), and
computes the largest adjacent projected-coordinate gap 𝐺𝑑
(𝑂(𝑛)). This gap is purely geometric and is not based on path
cost or heuristic values. As shown in Figure 5 (a), we project
the current wavefront onto 𝑥and 𝑦. While the 𝑦projection
is evenly distributed, the 𝑥projection shows a clear gap,
indicating a possible splitting opportunity. If max𝑑𝐺𝑑≥𝛽𝑟𝑛,
Arborist partitions the tree at the midpoint of the largest
qualifying gap, where 𝑟𝑛is the FMT* neighborhood radius and
𝛽controls split aggressiveness. The split enables independent
sub-tree expansion. This approach provides a simple yet efficient
approximation of high-dimensional clustering, avoiding the
heavy cost of MST computation.
One potential issue with a naive, greedy tree-splitting strategy
is that it might result in suboptimal path planning. In FMT*, tree
expansion rate is determined by the number of nodes updated per
wavefront rather than the cumulative path cost. As a result, trees
expand faster in sparse regions than dense ones. In Figure 4
(a) (Step 1), the orange branch in a narrow passage advances
rapidly and consumes nearby samples before the blue branch
arrives, preventing the latter—despite representing the optimal
path—from reaching the goal. This imbalance highlights a key
limitation of naive splitting: while it improves parallelism, it
can degrade solution quality due to uncoordinated competition
among trees.
B. Step 2: Tree Overriding
To mitigate the quality degradation from Step 1, Arborist
introduces Step 2, a tree-overriding mechanism that dynamically
prioritizes trees based on path cost and allows a slower tree to
reclaim nodes from a faster one when doing so improves the
global solution.
When a tree attempts to connect to a node, it first checks
whether that node has already been claimed by another tree. If so,
the connection with the lower path cost (𝑔(·)) takes precedence,
overriding the previous assignment. For example, in Figure 4
(a) (Step 2), the green path has a lower path cost than the red
one, prompting the conflicting red node to be overridden. This
tree overriding mechanism enforces global path optimality by
ensuring that only the most cost-efficient connections persist.
Handling Descendants of Overridden Nodes. When an
override occurs, we do not immediately update its descendants.
Instead, propagation updates nodes as the wavefront passes
through them again; if a better cost is found, the node is
updated. This approach requires each node to have only a
single parent pointer to maintain the tree structure, rather than
multiple pointers to all its descendants. As shown in Figure 5
(b), a shortcut from the green tree to the orange tree at point
1 is first discovered, triggering an override that assigns point
1 to the green tree. Subsequently, the green tree follows the
growth procedure, which simultaneously performs descendant
overrides (points 2 and 3) and normal growth (points 4, 5, and
6).
Therefore, tree overriding inevitably introduces additional
computational overhead because the overriding wavefront
passes through previously connected nodes again. Further-
more, suboptimal trees continue to grow, generating additional
branches that must later be overridden and further increasing
computational overhead.
C. Step 3: Global Competition Management
When a connection override occurs from Step 2, the affected
(victim) tree enters a hibernation state. During hibernation,
the tree suspends expansion but remains visible to other trees,
allowing further overrides if a better connection emerges. A
hibernating tree is reactivated once its wavefront cost drops
below that of the overriding tree, indicating that the com-
peting tree can no longer yield a superior path. Meanwhile,
computational resources (e.g., for neighbor search and collision
checking) from hibernating trees are dynamically reallocated to
active ones. This mechanism effectively eliminates unnecessary
computation from Step 2 (tree overriding) and improves overall
efficiency.
Hibernation vs. Purging. Hibernation differs from purging
(permanent deactivation) in that it preserves potentially optimal
subtree structures: even when a single suboptimal connection
triggers tree-wide suspension, other portions may still be
optimal and can later reactivate once the tree’s wavefront cost


Original
Baseline
Step 1: 
Split tree to parallel 
Tree Build Procedure
<
Override
Baseline
...
...
...
...
...
...
Baseline
...
...
Short 
latency
Step 2: 
Introducing Overriding among trees
Step 3: 
Global Competition Management
Limited 
Tree 
Growth
time
time
time
time
Speedup
Speedup
Speedup
Proposed Arborist Algorithm
Worse Path 
Quality
Short 
latency
Extra 
Computation
Standard 
Path Quality
Short 
Latency
Standard 
Path Quality
Sequential Tree Building Procedure
 
→ NO Parallel Opportunity
 
→          Long Planning Latency
KD Tree Search 
Query Attempt
Starting Point
Goal Point
Tree Point
Overrided 
Tree Point
Final 
Path
Tree 
Edge
Cancelled 
Tree Edge
Unnecessary 
KD Tree Search
Planning 
Start
Planning 
Finish
Tree Competition
Start
Original
Baseline
Step 1: 
Split tree to parallel 
Tree Build Procedure
<
Override
Baseline
...
...
...
...
...
...
Baseline
...
...
Short 
latency
Step 2: 
Introducing Overriding among trees
Step 3: 
Global Competition Management
Limited 
Tree 
Growth
time
time
time
time
Speedup
Speedup
Speedup
Proposed Arborist Algorithm
Worse Path 
Quality
Short 
latency
Extra 
Computation
Standard 
Path Quality
Short 
Latency
Standard 
Path Quality
Sequential Tree Building Procedure
 
→ NO Parallel Opportunity
 
→          Long Planning Latency
KD Tree Search 
Query Attempt
Starting Point
Goal Point
Tree Point
Overrided 
Tree Point
Final 
Path
Tree 
Edge
Cancelled 
Tree Edge
Unnecessary 
KD Tree Search
Planning 
Start
Planning 
Finish
Tree Competition
Start
Wavefront points
Settled points
Obstacles
Unvisited points
𝑔(#) : Cost-to-come.
𝑐(𝑎, 𝑏): Path cost from 𝑎to 𝑏.
ℎ𝑎, 𝑏:heuristic cost, 
≔ 𝑏−𝑎!
𝜙"(𝑏) :cost of 𝑏via 𝑎, 
≔𝑔𝑎+ 𝑐(𝑎, 𝑏)
(a)
(b)
𝑔(𝒢)
⋯
Goal 
𝓖
⋯
𝑝
ℎ(𝑝, 𝒢)
𝑐(𝑝, 𝒢)
Start
⋯
𝑞
𝜙!(𝒢)
Fig. 4. (a) Tree splitting, overriding, and global competition management enable parallel multi-tree execution while preserving path quality. (b) Cross-tree
optimality check prunes trees that cannot improve the current goal cost, enabling correct termination.
𝑥
𝑦
3
4
2
1
gap
1
3
2
short-cut
discovered
1
3
2
4
5
6
descendants
override
normal
growth
4
5
6
(a) Tree splitting                                       (b) Tree overriding
Fig. 5. (a) Tree-splitting detection by finding the gap along each axis. (b) Tree
overriding: when a shortcut is discovered, its descendants are overridden in the
same process of tree growth, alongside normal growth.
becomes favorable. As shown in Step 3 of Figure 4 (a), the light-
blue branch resumes growth precisely because it was hibernated
rather than purged.
Algorithm. Arborist Competition Management is enabled by
two functions:
• PropagatingPoints(𝑧): find possible points to propagate. A
tree may grow to a node 𝑛if 𝑛∈𝑉unvisited or 𝑛belongs to
another tree. To eliminate futile competition, we propagate
only when 𝑔(𝑛) > 𝑔(𝑧), where 𝑔(·) is the cost, with
𝑔(𝑉unvisited) = +∞.
• ResolveClaim(𝑥): resolves ownership (claim vs. override)
and triggers hibernation if needed. Insert node 𝑥normally
if 𝑥∈𝑉unvisited. Otherwise, if 𝑥∈𝑉open ∪𝑉closed, update 𝑔(𝑥)
and its parent only when the new cost is lower; if 𝑥’s original
tree remains active, place it in hibernation.
D. Step 4: Cross-tree Optimality Check
Motivation. Because tree propagation speed in FMT* is not
directly correlated with path cost, the first tree to reach the
goal may not produce the optimal solution. Simply adopting the
original FMT* termination rule [18], i.e., stopping once the goal
point is selected, often yields suboptimal paths.
To address this, Arborist introduces a termination logic
(TL) tailored for multi-tree execution, termed the Cross-tree
Optimality Check (Figure 4 (b)). When the goal G is first reached
with cost 𝑔(G), Arborist evaluates every active tree T and its
wavefront nodes 𝑥, checking whether 𝜙𝑥(G) ≡𝑔(𝑥)+𝑐(𝑥, G) ≥
𝑔(𝑥) + ℎ(𝑥, G) ≥𝑔(G). If so, no path through 𝑥can improve
the current solution, since ℎ(𝑥, G) is an admissible heuristic,
a lower bound on the true cost 𝑐(𝑥, G). Thus, tree T can be
pruned safely.
For example, in Figure 4 (b), the left tree containing point 𝑝is
discarded, whereas the middle tree containing point 𝑞is retained
since it may still yield a shorter path. The planner terminates
once the goal G is reached and all other trees have been pruned.
This procedure guarantees global optimality while minimizing
redundant computation, as only trees with a provable potential
for improvement are maintained. Our experimental results in
Section VI-B validate this design.
E. Putting it Together
Algorithm 1 Arborist Motion Planning Algorithm
Require: samples in X𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒, start 𝑥𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡, goal 𝑥𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙, max trees 𝑁
1: Initialize: 𝑉𝑢𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑑←all samples; create tree T0 rooted at
𝑥𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡in manager M; 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑←false
2: while true do
3:
Z ←lowest-cost wavefront nodes across all active trees
4:
if Z = ∅then return success if 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑else fail
5:
for each 𝑧∈Z (with home tree T) do
6:
if 𝑧= 𝑥𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙then 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑←true
7:
if 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑and CrossTreeOptCheck then return
success
8:
Expand 𝑧: for each 𝑥∈PropagatingPoints(𝑧),
select the minimum-cost candidate parent from
eligible OPEN neighbors; if its edge to 𝑥is collision-
free, apply ResolveClaim(𝑥) and move newly
connected 𝑥to T .𝑉𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛
9:
Move 𝑧from 𝑉𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛to 𝑉𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑
10:
if |M| < 𝑁then attempt split on T
Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete workflow of the
proposed Arborist algorithm in Figure 4. Arborist breaks


the inherently sequential execution of baseline FMT* by en-
abling concurrent multi-tree expansion. Through its coordinated
mechanisms (tree overriding, global competition management,
and cross-tree optimality checking), Arborist preserves the
dynamic-programming semantics of baseline FMT* and guar-
antees the same optimal path cost while significantly improving
computational efficiency.
Correctness intuition. Arborist preserves FMT* correctness
because all introduced parallelism is schedule-only. Lower-cost
claims always override higher-cost ones, hibernation defers
but never discards potentially optimal work, and termination
removes only trees whose admissible lower bound cannot
improve the incumbent solution. Taken together, these properties
make Arborist equivalent to a reordered sequential execution
of FMT*. Figures 14 and 17 provide empirical support for this
intuition.
Correctness invariant. Consider the fixed sampled roadmap
𝐺= (𝑉, 𝐸) with deterministic edge validity and weights.
Each node 𝑣maintains a label 𝑔(𝑣), parent 𝑝(𝑣), and owner
tree. A tree expansion only generates relaxation claims of the
form (𝑥, 𝑔(𝑦) + 𝑤(𝑦, 𝑥), 𝑦, 𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑑) for collision-free edges
(𝑦, 𝑥). These claims are committed through a hardware Commit
Arbiter: for each node 𝑥, the arbiter selects the minimum-
cost claim, with a deterministic tie-breaker, and updates the
Node Table only if the claim improves 𝑔(𝑥). Since this
operation is an atomic min over valid relaxations, simultaneous
claims to the same node are serializable and equivalent to a
deterministic sequential order. Tree splitting only partitions the
OPEN frontier. Tree override occurs only after a lower-cost
claim wins and preserves the victim frontier under the winning
owner. Therefore, by induction over committed relaxations, the
parallel algorithm preserves the sequential relaxation semantics
and converges to the same node labels; equal-cost ties can change
only the selected parent, not the path cost.
To evaluate Arborist on a conventional platform, we
implement a multi-threaded C++ version and run it on a
multiprocessor CPU. As shown in Table II, four CPU threads
provide 2.3× speedup on 2D-City and 1.3× on 2D-Maze
relative to one thread. This limited gain suggests that general-
purpose processors cannot effectively capture inter-tree paral-
lelism, largely due to thread synchronization overhead, irregular
execution, and memory bottlenecks in neighbor search. These
observations motivate a domain-specialized architecture for
Arborist. Accordingly, Section IV presents ArboristAccel, a
hardware design that enables Arborist to better exploit both its
inter-tree parallelism and additional architectural optimization
opportunities for higher power, performance, and area (PPA)
efficiency.
IV. Arborist Hardware Architecture
In this section, we present ArboristAccel, our hardware ar-
chitecture that implements Arborist, as illustrated in Figure 6.
ArboristAccel is organized into four key components: (1) the
Arborist Toolbox (Section IV-A), which provides hardware
support for inter-tree parallelism described in Section III; (2)
a KD-tree Subsystem (Section IV-B) for high-throughput
Tree 0
…
Split 
Det.
ID & Life Cycle
Heap State
Competition Manage
LPE Speculation
Tree State Table
Tree Heap
Reorder Buffer
Goal 
Check
Cross-tree 
Opt. Check 
𝑧!
𝑧"
Input Config
ID & Life Cycle
Tree Summary
Split Interface
Manager State Table
Tree 𝑁
Query 
Identifier
Balance
FIFO
Neighbor 
Cache
Query 
Filter
KD Tree 
Construction
Top Tree Units
Bucket Units
IV. A Arborist Toolbox 
Multi-Bank Point Memory
Coll. 
Det.
IV. C 
Parallel-Query 
Retrieval
IV. D
Look-ahead 
Planning
IV. B
KD Tree 
Subsys.
Hierarchical Query Distributor
Fig. 6.
Overview of ArboristAccel. The architecture is organized into
four components: the Arborist Toolbox for multi-tree control, the KD-tree
subsystem for neighbor search and construction, the Parallel-Query Retrieval
path for balanced memory access and query generation, and the Look-ahead
Planning path for speculative execution. These components interact through the
multi-bank point memory to exploit both inter-tree and intra-tree parallelism.
near-neighbor search and dynamic replanning support; (3) a
Parallel-Query Retrieval (PQR) module (Section IV-C) that
balances multi-bank memory accesses to alleviate system-
level memory bandwidth bottlenecks; and (4) a Look-ahead
Planning Engine (LPE) (Section IV-D) that exploits intra-tree
parallelism while preserving path quality by in-order commit.
We further discuss the programmability and extensibility in
Section IV-E.
A. Arborist Toolbox
As shown in Figure 6, the Arborist Toolbox is the control
substrate that realizes the inter-tree parallelism introduced in
Section III. Rather than accelerating nearest-neighbor search
directly, it manages the lifecycle of multiple concurrent FMT-
style trees and enforces the control rules needed to preserve
correctness under parallel expansion. Concretely, the toolbox
consists of a global Arborist Manager, a Split Detector, Tree
Units, and a collision detector.
Arborist Manager. The Arborist Manager is a lightweight
global controller that maintains a manager state table and
compact per-tree summaries, including tree identity, lifecycle
state, and status signals needed for competition management and
termination. It is responsible for selecting active trees, issuing
split commands, coordinating node migration between trees, and
arbitrating events such as override, hibernation, reactivation, and
goal detection.
Split Detector. The Split Detector is the hardware realization of
the Step-1 gap test. Instead of sorting projected coordinates, it
constructs a fixed-bin histogram for each examined dimension,
converts non-empty bins into an occupancy bitset, and identifies
the Longest Zero Run (LZR). A zero run of length LZR
corresponds to an empty coordinate interval of approximately
LZR · 𝑤bin. The detector uses the threshold 𝑇ℎ:= 𝛽𝑟𝑛/𝑤bin
and triggers when LZR ≥𝑇ℎ, where 𝑤bin is the bin width, 𝑟𝑛is
FMT*’s neighbor radius, and 𝛽is a tunable hyperparameter. This
approximates the software condition 𝐺𝑑≥𝛽𝑟𝑛. The lightweight
detector enables real-time identification of separable clusters
with minimal computational overhead.


Tree Units. Each active tree unit is backed by a dedicated heap
that stores its open-set wavefront as an independent priority
queue. These heaps are paired with per-tree state tables that
record local execution metadata, such as heap status and tree-
level bookkeeping needed by the manager. Each tree unit also
has a reorder buffer to support LPE speculation mentioned in
Section IV-D.
Collision Detector. ArboristAccel exposes collision checking
through a fixed edge-validity request/response interface rather
than a universal rule language. The FMT* datapath issues a
request containing the candidate edge endpoints and receives
a binary valid/collision response. For 2D/3D workloads, the
checker performs occupancy-grid or voxel-grid traversal over
map memory. For 5D/7D arm workloads, it performs fixed-
DoF forward kinematics and rasterizes each link against a 2D
occupancy map. Because FMT* performs lazy edge validation
and collision checking is a small fraction of the profiled runtime,
ArboristAccel focuses on the shared FMT substrate; retar-
geting binds the same interface to the appropriate benchmark-
specific checker.
B. KD-Tree Subsystem with Dynamic Planning Support
As shown in Figure 6, ArboristAccel combines a two-stage
KD-tree Subsystem [50]–[54] for near-neighbor queries with an
exact-balanced KD-tree constructor for dynamic-environment
support.
KD-Tree Search. ArboristAccel’s KD-tree search engine
builds on Tigris [54], employing a two-stage pipeline: (1)
multiple front-end Top-Tree Units (TTUs) that exploit query-
level parallelism, and (2) multiple back-end Bucket Units (BUs)
that provide node-level parallelism.
Exactly Balanced Two-Stage KD-Tree Constructor for
Fast Tree Build and Dynamic Planning. In software im-
plementations, KD-tree construction accounts for only about
0.6–6.3% of the total time, since tens of thousands of KD-
tree searches dominate. Under the ArboristAccel optimization
it exceeds 50%, creating a need for an on-chip KD-tree
constructor. Unlike Tigris [54], ArboristAccel integrates an
on-chip KD-tree constructor that supports rapid re-sampling
and balanced top-tree reconstruction. The constructor uses a
hardware-optimized Quickselect algorithm [55] to identify the
exact median in expected 𝑂(𝑛) time without sorting all samples.
This design maintains balanced KD-trees across planning iter-
ations, thereby preserving high neighbor-search throughput and
predictable latency under dynamic workloads. It also enables
the deployment for IAFMT*/IABFMT* on ArboristAccel as
they need iterative planning (Section IV-E).
C. Parallel-Query Retrieval
The Parallel Query Retrieval (PQR) subsystem in Arboris-
tAccel optimizes query throughput, memory bandwidth, and
access locality through three tightly integrated components: (1)
a Ring-buffer Neighbor Cache for high-reuse query data, (2) a
high-throughput query identifier coupled with a multi-banked
point memory for concurrent access, and (3) a Balance FIFO
for data layout optimization. Together, these modules sustain
Balance FIFO
KD Tree Subsys.
addr % N
Neighbor 
Cache
H
T
…
Neighbor Addr Write
Multi-bank
Point 
Memory
B0
…
…
…
B1
B2
Neighbor Access
Query Identifier
𝑛in 
another 
tree
𝑛
valid?
Query Distribution
Query Identification
Fig. 7. Parallel-Query Retrieval design. Neighbor addresses from the KD-tree
subsystem are balanced across FIFO lanes, cached, used to access the multi-bank
Point Memory, and filtered by the Query Identifier to generate valid downstream
queries. Circles denote addresses, squares denote node entries, and H and T
denote the head and tail of the ring buffer.
high utilization of the KD-tree subsystem and alleviate the
memory bottlenecks that typically limit nearest-neighbor search
performance.
As illustrated in Figure 7, ArboristAccel employs a
Neighbor Cache to store each returned neighbor’s address
together with the edge cost computed during KD-tree radius
search. Caching the cost allows downstream stages to reuse the
neighbor list without refetching point coordinates for distance
recomputation. The cache is implemented as a ring buffer to
efficiently accommodate variable-length neighbor lists produced
during each motion planning iteration. A Query Identifier then
fetches the corresponding neighbor points from the on-chip
Multi-bank Point Memory in response to neighbor cache reads.
Points that pass the PropagatingPoints check (Section III-C)
are marked as valid queries and dispatched to the next stage.
Multi-banked Point Memory. To sustain sufficient throughput,
ArboristAccel employs a multi-banked Point Memory design
that provides high read bandwidth and ensures an adequate
number of valid queries per cycle. This architecture significantly
improves KD-tree TTU utilization.
Balance FIFO for Data Layout Optimization.
However,
simply increasing the number of point-memory banks does
not guarantee full throughput because neighbor counts vary
across query nodes, producing a nonuniform data layout across
banks. To address this, we insert a lightweight Balance FIFO
(BF), inspired by [56], into the neighbor-cache write stage. It
dynamically equalizes per-bank load before neighbor addresses
are enqueued in the Neighbor Cache. Each BF lane is aligned
with a Point Memory bank. In practice, BF delivers substantial
speedups by redistributing neighbor addresses and balancing
traffic to the Point Memory subsystem (see Section VI-B).
D. Look-ahead Planning
ArboristAccel supports intra-tree parallelism through a
speculative execution strategy that breaks the inherent data
dependencies across iterations in FMT*, realized by the Look-
ahead Planning Engine (LPE).
Intuition. FMT* expansion is inherently sequential: each
wavefront of nodes must be fully processed before the next
can begin. This strict ordering limits hardware utilization, as
many compute units remain idle while waiting for dependencies
to resolve. However, most node expansions in practice are


...
...
①
②
③ 
①
②
③ 
(a) Finish i-1 th Update  
(d) Predict Minimum at time i+1 
...
①
②
③ 
...
①
②
③ 
time
Proposed
Original
Speed Up
Settled 
Point
Tree 
Edge
x
Y
time
cost
x
Y
time
cost
Lower Cost
Higher Cost
(b) Get Minimum at time i 
(b) Get Minimum at time i 
Wavefront Propagation:
Earlier nodes tend to 
have lower costs.
Our Strategy: Predict 
Second Minimal at time i
as Minimal at time i+1
Process & Update
...
...
②
③ 
④
(c) Get Minimum at time i+1
time
...
Unvisited 
Point
Wavefront 
Point
Obstacle
Batch
Selected Batch With 
Minimal Cost
Process & Update
Process & Update
...
Process & Update
Fig. 8. Example of Look-ahead Planning (𝐿= 1). In the baseline pipeline
(top), steps (a), (b), and (c) execute sequentially: in (b), the algorithm selects the
minimum-cost wavefront point at time 𝑖, and only after processing and updating
it can the minimum for time 𝑖+1 be determined. The proposed scheme (bottom)
predicts that earlier-generated wavefront nodes tend to have lower costs, as
shown in the bottom-left inset [57]. It can therefore process the minimum at
time 𝑖in (b) and the predicted minimum at time 𝑖+1 in (d) in parallel.
Mark 
READY
Tree 
heap
state
z_id
seq
h_seq
t_seq
Reorder Buffer
Head
…
Tail
allocate
Q. ID.
Q. Dist. + 
Q. Filter
KD Tree 
Subsys.
Neighbor 
Cache
Validation
 Head is 
READY
Mismatch
Handling
✔
✖
Collision
Detection
Write
to Point 
Memory
t_seq-h_seq<L
Issue
Execution
Complete
Commit
Fig. 9. LPE architecture. A per-tree reorder buffer (ROB) enables speculative
look-ahead execution of future wavefront nodes while preserving sequential
FMT* semantics through in-order commit.
independent; their outcomes do not affect each other’s feasibility
or cost evaluation within the same iteration.
Design. As shown in Figure 8, the Look-ahead Planning Engine
(LPE) speculatively advances future wavefront expansions, i.e.,
up to 𝐿look-ahead steps, before the current iteration is fully
committed. To preserve path quality and correctness under spec-
ulation, each tree unit is equipped with a lightweight Reorder
Buffer (ROB) that enforces in-order commit of valid wavefront
queries, thereby preserving the semantics of sequential FMT*
execution. The physical ROB storage is implemented as a
circular buffer indexed by the sequence number modulo the
ROB capacity, with head and tail counters used for commit and
allocation.
The LPE microarchitecture is illustrated in Figure 9. Similar
to a conventional out-of-order processor, it is organized into
four stages: issue, execution, complete, and commit, all centered
around the ROB. During the issue stage, a new wavefront node
𝑧can be issued from the tree heap and allocated into the ROB
whenever the speculation window is not full, i.e., when t_seq
- h_seq < L. Here, h_seq and t_seq denote the sequence
numbers of the ROB head and tail, respectively.
In the execution stage, the issued node passes through the
Query Identifier, Query Distributor, and Query Filter and
then enters the KD-tree subsystem to retrieve its neighbor
information. In the complete stage, the retrieved neighbor list is
written into the Neighbor Cache, and the corresponding ROB
entry is marked READY. Once the head entry becomes READY,
it proceeds to the commit stage.
At commit time, the ROB validates whether the speculative
result is still consistent with the current tree state. Specifically,
when committing 𝑧𝑗, for each candidate 𝑥produced during
speculation, we recompute its best parent using the current open
set:
𝑦∗(𝑥) ∈arg
min
𝑦∈𝑉( 𝑗−1)
open ∩Near(𝑥)
𝜙𝑦(𝑥),
(1)
where 𝜙𝑦(𝑥) := 𝑔(𝑦) + 𝑐(𝑦, 𝑥) is the candidate cost-to-come
through 𝑦, and 𝑐(𝑦, 𝑥) is the connecting edge cost. ROB
validation reuses the cached neighbor entries generated during
speculative execution. For each cached neighbor 𝑦, the valida-
tion stage reads the corresponding node-state entry from the
per-tree Tree State Table to obtain current OPEN membership
and cost-to-come 𝑔(𝑦), filters non-OPEN nodes, and reduces
𝜙𝑦(𝑥) := 𝑔(𝑦) + 𝑐(𝑦, 𝑥) using the cached edge weight. This
avoids scanning the OPEN heap, scanning the Tree State Table,
rerunning KD-tree search, or refetching full point coordinates
during commit validation. We then perform collision checking
and update the tree state only at commit. In this way, speculation
is allowed to compute read-only intermediate results early, but
it is not allowed to modify the global planning state before
validation.
If earlier commits have changed the wavefront such that
the speculative choice is no longer optimal or feasible, i.e.,
Equation (1) fails, the Mismatch Handling module is triggered. It
flushes all younger ROB entries according to their seq numbers,
reinserts the flushed 𝑧nodes back into the tree heap, and restarts
execution from the corrected state.
Hierarchical Query Distributor with Query Filter. With
ArboristAccel’s Look-Ahead Planning and Tree-Splitting
mechanisms, the KD-tree subsystem must sustain a substantially
higher query rate. Supporting both inter-tree and intra-tree
parallelism requires issuing multiple queries per cycle, making
query dispatch a key bottleneck. To address this challenge,
ArboristAccel employs a Hierarchical Query Distributor
with Query Filter (HQD-QF), shown in Figure 10, which
partitions the Top Tree Units (TTUs) into independent sets
and performs scalable query dispatch with early duplicate
suppression.
The HQD-QF is organized into three stages. First, incoming
queries are buffered in multiple Query FIFOs (QFs). Second,
a set of lightweight arbiters selects valid queries from these
QFs and forwards them to their assigned TTU set. Third, before
issue, each query is checked against a lightweight per-set Query
History structure that records recently issued queries. If a match
is found, the query is discarded; otherwise, it is inserted into the


Top Tree 
Unit
Queries
QF
QF
QF
Arb
Arb
Query 
History
Any 
Match?
Yes, then discard
No, save to QH & issue
Top Tree 
Unit
⋮
⋮
Query Distributor
Query Filter
Write
Read
Issuer
Query Issue
valid bits
Fig. 10. Hierarchical Query Distributor with Query Filter. Queries are buffered
in Query FIFOs (QFs), selected by lightweight arbiters, checked against a per-set
query-history structure, and then issued to available Top Tree Units. Duplicate
queries are discarded before issue, reducing redundant speculative KD-tree
lookups.
AT
PQR
LPE
KD-Tree
KD-
Const
Tree 
Init
Tree 
Growth
Tree
Split
Opt. 
Check
Start
Done
Arborist                        FMT*            BFMT*         IAFMT*    IABFMT*
Goal
Get
Two
Trees
Trees
Meet
Fig. 11. Configurable ArboristAccel organization for FMT-family planners.
All variants reuse the PQR/LPE/KD-tree execution kernel, while planner-
specific behavior is realized by reconfiguring the control layer. Modules with
same color are same config directly reuse. Striped modules denote intended
control changes and the red path denotes iterative planning feedback.
query history and forwarded to a local issuer, which dispatches
it to an available TTU according to the returned valid bits.
E. Programmability and Extensibility
FMT-Family Support. Although ArboristAccel is built from
specialized functional units, it is not hard-wired to a single
planner. Its flexibility comes from a clean separation between
a fixed execution substrate (the KD-tree pipeline, PQR, and
LPE, which together implement the kernels shared by FMT-
family planners: neighbor retrieval, candidate-parent evaluation,
lazy edge validation, and ordered commit) and a configurable
control layer exposed via the Arborist Toolbox (active-tree
count, root initialization, split threshold, goal/meeting logic,
override/hibernation, pruning, and look-ahead depth). Future
algorithmic changes that preserve the FMT-style wavefront
expansion can therefore be realized by reconfiguring control
policies while reusing the same datapath.
Figure 11 illustrates this decomposition: the upper row repre-
sents planner-specific control behavior, while the lower row rep-
resents the shared PQR/LPE/KD-tree module. FMT*, BFMT*,
IAFMT*, and IABFMT* exercise different software control
paths; Arborist enables tree splitting, overriding/hibernation,
and cross-tree optimality checking. As a result, the same silicon
retargets across the FMT*-family without redesigning the core
neighbor-search, memory, or tree-expansion datapath.
Arbitrary Dimension Support. We support multidimensional
states using a fixed-width vector datapath and hardware time-
multiplexing. The datapath processes four dimensions (D) per
cycle. If 𝐷> 4, ArboristAccel reuses the datapath across
multiple cycles.
V. Evaluation Setup
This section details Arborist’s implementation, together
with the workloads, baselines, and metrics used for our eval-
uation.
A. Arborist Implementation
We implement both the original FMT* and Arborist algo-
rithm in C++. ArboristAccel is written in SystemVerilog and
synthesized with Synopsys Design Compiler on a commercial
16nm technology process, with a target frequency of 500 MHz.
All memory modules are implemented with foundry-provided
SRAM macros.
Hardware Configuration. For the Arborist Toolbox, we
instantiate one Arborist Manager, one Split Detector, and
eight per-tree heaps (each with a 2 kB SRAM). The KD-tree
subsystem includes 64 TTUs and 64 BUs, backed by a 2 kB top-
tree cache and a 1 kB bucket cache. The LPE uses a 128 B reorder
buffer. The PQR subsystem comprises a 32-bank Point Memory
(256 kB total) and a 16 kB Neighbor Cache; the Balance FIFO
threshold is set to 8 entries, with a total size of 768 B. The design
has eight Min. Connect Units and eight Collision Detection
Units.
Accelerator Power and Area. The total power and area of
ArboristAccel are 379.6 mW and 1.22 mm2, respectively.
Latency. The latency numbers are from our cycle-accurate
ArboristAccel simulator. It explicitly accounts for dynamic
effects including speculation success/failure, false-speculation
recovery through the LPE mismatch-handling path, tree overrid-
ing/hibernation, variable neighbor-list lengths, and multi-bank
memory conflicts.
B. Workloads
Arborist is evaluated on RTRBench [58], a standardized
motion-planning benchmark suite that is also used by prior path-
planning accelerators such as RACOD [24] and MOPED [26].
We use a set of five representative workloads that span different
application domains and planning dimensionalities. For 2D
navigation, we select city and maze maps from the widely
used benchmark suite of [59], covering urban driving–like
scenarios as well as highly cluttered maze environments. For
3D planning, we adopt volumetric maps from OctoMap [60],
representative of UAV and aerial-robot workloads. To evaluate
high-DoF manipulation, we follow RTRBench and use its 5D
robot arm and an extended 7D arm configuration.
C. Hardware Baselines
We compare Arborist against four baselines:
• CPU Arborist: a multi-thread C++ implementation of
Arborist compiled with -O3, measured on an AMD Ryzen
Threadripper 3960X (3.8 GHz, 768 GB RAM). Area/power
are reported on 4 cores (50 mm2, 40 W).
• GPU GMT* [20]: a GPU implementation of FMT* with
a 10% path-quality drop; included as a high-performance
baseline. Performance is taken from the reported NVIDIA
GTX 980 results (398 mm2, 165 W TDP).


• ASIC w/ Tigris [54]: Our baseline FMT* ASIC design based
on Tigris-style KD-tree. We synthesize it with 500 MHz
on the same 16nm node for a fair comparison (0.635 mm2,
134.5 mW).
• MOPED [26]: a state-of-the-art motion planning accelerator
based on RRT* [17]. The results are scaled to 14 nm using
Deep-ScaleTool [61], since 16 nm is not directly supported;
14 nm is a favorable scaling to MOPED and therefore
conservative with respect to our claimed improvement. The
original metrics at 28 nm are 0.62 mm2 and 137.5 mW. The
latency is obtained by running RRT* on same test cases until
the path costs match our results with FMT*/Arborist, then
scale to MOPED using the speedup factor (∼3000×) reported
in [26].
Unless stated otherwise, Table I lists the Arborist evaluation
settings. 𝑁is the number of samples; 𝛽controls the LZR Split
Detector; MAX_TREE is the maximum number of trees; and 𝐿
is the number of look-ahead steps.
TABLE I
Evaluation Settings.
Scene
Dim
𝑁
𝛽
MAX_TREE
LPE Step 𝐿
2D-City
2
20k
0.75
8
5
2D-Maze
2
20k
0.50
8
5
3D-Drone
3
20k
0.50
8
10
5D-Arm
5
10k
0.50
8
5
7D-Arm
7
10k
0.25
8
10
VI. Evaluation
We first evaluate Arborist’s system-level benefits and then
examine the impact of each architectural decision on Arboris-
tAccel performance.
Efficiency Definition. We define power and area efficiency as
𝐸= speedup × (𝑉𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒/𝑉), where 𝑉represents the reported
or modeled power or area, and speedup is relative to the four-
thread CPU baseline. This metric penalizes designs that achieve
speedup through disproportionate increases in power or area.
A. System-level Benefits
Power, Performance, and Area (PPA) Comparison. Fig-
ure 12 compares ArboristAccel against CPU, GPU, ASIC
w/ Tigris, and MOPED across five workloads using the perfor-
mance model. In speedup, GPUs are around 102, while ASIC
w/ Tigris and MOPED peak at 6.4 × 102 and 3.5 × 102, respec-
tively. ArboristAccel is the best performer overall, reaching
2.8 × 103 on 2D-Maze and sustaining more than 103 speedup
across all workloads. Its area and power efficiency (normalized
to 4T CPU) reach 1.1×105 and 2.9×105, respectively. Averaged
across workloads (geomean), ArboristAccel improves over
ASIC w/ Tigris by 8.8× in speedup, 4.6× in area efficiency, and
3.1× in power efficiency. Relative to MOPED, the corresponding
factors are 8.6×, 1.0×, and 1.8×, respectively. The end-to-end
energy per planning query remains below 1.2 mJ across all
workloads on ArboristAccel. Specifically, ArboristAccel
consumes 0.590 mJ on 2D-City, 1.175 mJ on 2D-Maze, 0.763
Fig. 12. System PPA comparison. Annotated values are normalized to ASIC w/
Tigris; the y-axis is normalized to the four-thread CPU baseline.
TABLE II
Latency comparison (ms); T denotes CPU threads.
CPU
GPU
ASIC w/
Scene
1T
2T
4T
24T
GMT*
Tigris
MOPED
Ours
2D-City
4,466
2,550
1,951
2,009
44.66
23.322
15.00
1.555
2D-Maze
11,298
8,044
8,668
7,831
112.98
46.276
37.95
3.096
3D-Drone
4,025
3,695
3,275
3,026
40.25
28.261
14.88
2.009
5D-Arm
3,083
2,765
2,294
2,133
30.83
4.120
7.14
1.054
7D-Arm
5,010
5,461
4,441
4,509
50.10
6.951
12.80
1.660
mJ on 3D-Drone, 0.400 mJ on 5D-Arm, and 0.630 mJ on 7D-
Arm.
The execution latencies are shown in Table II. We profile
CPU Arborist using up to 24 threads. Due to multithreaded
synchronization overhead, CPU speedup largely saturates at four
threads when processing parallel trees.
Ablation Study. Figure 13 reports an ablation study that
quantifies the incremental contributions of ArboristAccel’s
key innovations, i.e., Parallel Query Retrieval, Arborist Tool-
box, and Look-ahead Planning, to overall system efficiency.
Starting from the ASIC w/ Tigris baseline, adding Parallel
Query Retrieval yields 1.2–2.4× speedup and area efficiency
up to 1.3×, but area efficiency falls below 1× in 5D/7D.
Incorporating the Arborist Toolbox reaches 6.3× speedup
and 3.3× area efficiency, but only 1.4–1.6× speedup in 5D/7D.
Finally, enabling Look-ahead Planning (LPE) delivers the
largest benefit, with the optimal depth varying by scene (see
Table I): speedup reaches 15.0× in 2D-City, 14.9× in 2D-
Maze, 14.1× in 3D-Drone, and 3.9–4.2× in 5D/7D-Arm. Area
efficiency peaks at 7.8× in 2D-City and is 2.0–2.2× in 5D/7D.
Power efficiency reaches 5.3× in 2D-City and 2D-Maze and 1.4–
1.5× in 5D/7D. Across all workloads (geomean), the best look-
ahead configuration achieves 8.8× speedup, 4.6× area efficiency,
and 3.1× power efficiency over the ASIC w/ Tigris starting point.
These results indicate that while each optimization contributes
individually, they can all be integrated to achieve compounding
PPA benefits.
Path Planning Quality. Figure 14 compares the path planning
quality of Arborist against the baseline FMT*, and a naive
split scheme without Arborist Toolbox (or global competition
management). While the naive split scheme also exploits parallel
processing to reduce latency, it significantly degrades path
quality by increasing the path length, on all evaluated maps. In


Fig. 13. Ablation study on ArboristAccel.
Fig. 14. Path Planning Quality.
contrast, Arborist design (both in algorithm and on hardware)
preserves the same optimal path cost as the original FMT*, and
therefore achieves identical path quality while enabling high
speedup, power and area efficiency. This requirement is strict in
practice, because path quality directly determines the operating
time and energy consumption required for the whole robot
system, rather than the motion planning computation alone.
B. Sensitivity Study
Maximum Number of Trees (MAX_TREE). Figure 15(a)
sweeps MAX_TREE and TTU count on Boston city and
a Maze map [59]. Both saturate beyond 6–8 trees, since
the exploitable parallelism is ultimately bounded by obstacle
structure. Boston (frequent wavefront reconvergence) incurs
competition-management overhead when TTUs are scarce, but
benefits substantially once enough TTUs are provisioned; Maze
(diverging wavefronts) shows negligible overhead throughout.
Higher-dimensional workloads follow the Boston trend, so
picking MAX_TREE according to obstacle density (typically
4–8) balances competition overhead against parallelism.
Effect of TTU Count on System Speedup. Figure 15(b)
reports end-to-end speedup vs. total TTU count with look-ahead
planning enabled to exploit intra-tree parallelism. Compared
to inter-tree parallelism alone (which saturates around 16–32
TTUs in (a)), look-ahead pushes near-saturation out to roughly
128 total TTUs. However, increasing the count from 64 to
128 yields only 2.1–30.9% additional speedup across these
workloads despite doubling the TTUs. The additional traversal
and buffering resources increase area and power cost, motivating
our choice of 64 TTUs as the default configuration.
𝛽sensitivity for LZR Split Detector. Figure 16 shows average
parallelism (bars) and the hardware speedup (line) versus the
Boston
Maze
(a)
(b)
Fig. 15. (a) Effect of MAX_TREE; (b) Number of TTUs on System Speedup.
Fig. 16. 𝛽sensitivity for the LZR Split Detector.
split threshold 𝛽. Lower thresholds split more aggressively,
yielding higher parallelism and speedup, though speedup grows
sub-linearly due to memory-bandwidth contention on Point
Memory and issue-width limits of the Hierarchical Query
Distributor. Across workloads, parallelism reaches 1.75–5.6×
and speedup 1.5–3.0×, with 2D-City peaking at 𝛽=0.5. The
best operating point lies where the speedup curve flattens:
𝛽∈[0.5, 1.0] captures most of the achievable gain across all
workloads.
Effectiveness of Cross-tree Optimality Check. As shown
in Figure 17, omitting the proposed termination logic (TL)
in Arborist leads to up to 3.3% additional path cost. In
contrast, with TL enabled, all cases achieve the optimal path,
demonstrating that our termination logic guarantees path quality.
We also evaluate the benefit of incorporating a heuristic function
ℎ(·) for pruning, as described in Section III-D and illustrated
in the right-hand figure. Using a simple ℓ2-norm heuristic as
a lower bound on path cost reduces additional runtime by
45.5% in the worst case and by 35.2% on average, showing
that our termination logic not only preserves optimality but also
maximizes efficiency.
Balance FIFO. The detailed results are shown in Figure 18.
Balance FIFO (BF) increases retrieval throughput by 90.2% on
average and by 116.7% with 16 banks. When integrated into
the full system (Figure 18), higher retrieval speeds gradually
shift the bottleneck away from memory, leading to diminishing
overall gains. Nonetheless, a 16-bank Balance FIFO achieves a
2.12× system speedup over the baseline.
Hierarchical Query Distributor. Figure 19(a) sweeps (𝑁, 𝑀)
configurations with 128 total TTUs and a 64-entry Query Filter
(𝑁sets of 𝑀TTUs, with a 64/𝑁-entry cache per set). The


Fig. 17. Termination Logic (TL) ablation. ℎ(·) denotes the heuristic used for
cost estimation; one 3D no-TL point is 3.3% above optimal.
Fig. 18. Parallel Query Retrieval Speedup.
blue frequency curve is compared with the gray 500 MHz target
line. Larger 𝑁eases timing and issues more parallel queries, but
splitting the cache raises area/power with diminishing returns.
The highlighted (8, 16) point is 35.3% faster than 𝑁=1 and only
1.8% slower than 𝑁=16 at acceptable overhead.
Impact of Look-ahead Planning and Discard Mechanism.
Figure 19 (b) shows the system speedup under different look-
ahead depth 𝐿. With 𝐿= 1, we achieve nearly 2× speedup with
almost no additional computation, since looking one step ahead
is highly likely to succeed. As 𝐿increases, speedup continues to
grow but not linearly, because of the increase of false speculation
causing redundant computation.
We also evaluate the effectiveness of the discard mechanism
provided by the Query Filter (Section IV-D). As shown in the
figure, discard substantially reduces redundant computation,
allowing the system to achieve consistently higher speedup at
the same 𝐿.
C. Programmability and Extensibility
To evaluate ArboristAccel’s programmability, we replay
four representative FMT*-family planners FMT*, BFMT*,
IAFMT*, and IABFMT* on the same datapath with KD-tree,
PQR, and LPE modules, and reconfigure only the control layer
described in Section IV-E (Figure 11). Table III reports the
per-stage latency breakdown on 2D-City with 10k samples.
Across all four planners, ArboristAccel delivers end-to-end
speedups ranging from 126.7× (BFMT*) to 470.7× (IAFMT*),
with a 294.6× geometric mean over the CPU baseline. The on-
chip KD-tree constructor accelerates tree building by up to 8×,
which is critical for the iterative variants (IAFMT*/IABFMT*)
that must repeatedly rebuild the tree under anytime refinement
and would otherwise be dominated by setup cost. To isolate
the constructor’s end-to-end benefit, we replace accelerator
construction with CPU-side build while keeping the neighbor
search on ArboristAccel, yielding 7.28×/8.03×/3.27×/3.58×
speedups for FMT*/BFMT*/IAFMT*/IABFMT* respectively,
confirming that on-chip building is essential under dynamic
Fig. 19.
(a) PPA trade-offs under different Hierarchical Query Distributor
settings. (b) Look-ahead Planning, where “discard” is whether to incorporate
the Query Filter to discard repeated queries.
TABLE III
Latency breakdown (ms) for FMT*-family algorithms on CPU and
ArboristAccel, using 2D-City with 10k samples. Speedups use
unrounded timings.
CPU
ArboristAccel
Planner
Build
Search
Total
Build
Search
Total
Speedup
FMT*
3.04
119.96
123.0
0.373
0.052
0.425
289.6×
BFMT*
3.11
46.22
49.3
0.373
0.016
0.389
126.7×
IAFMT*
9.34
1555.66
1565.0
1.800
1.525
3.325
470.7×
IABFMT*
10.00
1376.00
1386.0
1.800
1.377
3.178
436.2×
replanning where the tree must be rebuilt frequently. The shared
neighbor-search backend accelerates the CPU search stage by
approximately three orders of magnitude across all planners,
confirming that the PQR/LPE/KD-tree kernel remains effective
regardless of the planner-specific control policy. These results
show that ArboristAccel is not hard-wired to the Arborist
algorithm: the same silicon serves as a configurable substrate
for the broader FMT*-family at uniformly high efficiency.
VII. Related Work
Motion Planning Accelerators. Prior accelerators target mo-
tion planning end-to-end or its key subroutines [23], [38], [39],
[53], [54], [62]–[65]. Early systems target PRM [15], [62];
MOPED [26] co-designs algorithm and hardware for RRT* [17]
to reduce both collision-check frequency and cost; RACOD [24]
pairs a collision-detection accelerator with run-ahead search for
grid-based A* [25]; and MPAccel [63] eliminates redundant
collision checks via spatially aware early-exit scheduling.
Wavefront-Style Planning (FMT*). FMT* [18] expands an
implicit random geometric graph as a cost-to-come “wavefront”
via lazy dynamic-programming recursion, reducing collision
checks and shifting the bottleneck toward neighbor search [18],
[66]. A broad family of derivatives extends this principle [19]–
[22], [35], [36], underscoring FMT*’s role as a foundational
sampling-based planner and motivating accelerators that explic-
itly target wavefront expansion and high-rate nearest-neighbor
queries.
KD-tree Acceleration for Point Cloud Nearest-Neighbor
Search. A complementary line of work accelerates KD-tree [55]
nearest-neighbor (NN) search, a core primitive in 3D point-
cloud processing where NN queries dominate runtime [23],
[53], [54], [67]. These efforts exploit parallelism across queries


and along the traversal, with memory-aware data layouts to
mitigate bandwidth and locality bottlenecks [23], [53], [54];
GPU-oriented techniques additionally support fast KD-tree
(re)construction for dynamic point sets [51].
VIII. Conclusion
This work presents Arborist, an algorithm–hardware co-
design framework that exposes both inter- and intra-tree par-
allelism in the traditionally sequential FMT* algorithm via
parallel multi-tree expansion, competition management, and
look-ahead planning. Synthesized in 16 nm technology node
and operating at 500 MHz, ArboristAccel sustains more than
103× speedup over CPU and gives geomean improvements of
8.8× speedup, 4.6× area efficiency, and 3.1× power efficiency
over an FMT* ASIC baseline. The corresponding factors
relative to a state-of-the-art RRT*-based MOPED accelerator
are 8.6×/1.0×/1.8×, at comparable path cost.
Acknowledgments
We sincerely thank the anonymous reviewers for their in-
sightful feedback, which greatly improved the quality of this
paper. This work was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation (NSF) under Grant No. 2403409, No. 2239945, and
the ASU Center for Semiconductor Microelectronics (ACME).
Any opinions, findings, or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the funding agencies.
Appendix A
Artifact Appendix
A. Abstract
This appendix summarizes the artifact evaluation for Ar-
borist and ArboristAccel. The artifact contains the motion-
planning implementations and workloads, cycle-level simulator,
analysis scripts, and reference outputs used in this work. Release
v1.1.4 provides a Docker-based top-level workflow that builds
and runs the package, regenerates the selected figures and
tables, validates the outputs, and reports a single pass or failure.
Detailed instructions are included in the archive.
B. Artifact check-list (meta-information)
• Algorithm:
FMT*,
Arborist,
BFMT*,
IAFMT*,
and
IABFMT*.
• Program: C++ planners and Python simulation/analysis scripts.
• Compilation:
Docker
(recommended),
or
GNU
Make,
GCC/G++ with C++17 support, and Boost headers for a native
run.
• Data set: Packaged 2D-City, 2D-Maze, 3D-Drone, 5D-Arm, and
7D-Arm workloads.
• Run-time
environment:
x86-64
Linux
with
Docker;
Python 3.10 or newer is required only for a native run.
• Hardware:
Four logical CPUs and 8 GiB RAM are recom-
mended; no accelerator is required.
• Metrics:
Path cost, latency, cycles, speedup, area, power, and
energy.
• Output: Eight PDF figures, 17 CSV tables, logs, and a summary
report.
• Disk space required (approximately): 5 GiB.
• Preparation time (approximately): Under ten minutes when
the Docker image or native dependencies are available.
• Experiment time (approximately): About five minutes for the
default workflow.
• Publicly available?:
Yes, at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
22313402.
• Code license: MIT for author-created code; third-party notices
are included.
• Archived (DOI): https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.22313402.
C. Description
1) How to access: We released v1.1.4 with a Docker-based
workflow: download it from https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
22313402 and run ./run-docker.sh. The archive is self-
contained; no Git checkout, submodule, private account, or data
download is required.
2) Hardware dependencies: The default workflow runs on
a standard x86-64 Linux machine. Four logical CPUs, 8 GiB
RAM, and 5 GiB free disk are recommended. A GPU, FPGA,
RTL simulator, and commercial EDA tools are not required.
3) Software dependencies: The recommended workflow
requires Docker on an x86-64 Linux host. Its first image build
requires Internet access to retrieve the base image and packaged
dependencies; the evaluator container then runs without network
access. For the optional native workflow, compatible versions
are GCC/G++ 11 or newer, GNU Make 4 or newer, and
Python 3.10 or newer, together with Boost Container and
Boost Math headers. The native workflow verifies the complete
plotting dependency closure at exact pinned versions and creates
.venv-ae when the active Python environment does not
match.
4) Data sets: All five workload inputs are included in the
archive. Their sources, licenses, and checksums are listed in
artifact/DATA.md.
5) Hardware artifacts: The hardware/ directory provides
11 selected RTL files (eight report-matched components and
three shared dependencies) together with eight sanitized com-
ponent synthesis summaries.
D. Installation
After downloading the artifact, run:
sha256sum -c arborist-ae-1.1.4.tar.gz.sha256
tar -xzf arborist-ae-1.1.4.tar.gz
cd arborist-ae-1.1.4
./run-docker.sh
The Docker wrapper checks the package, builds the image,
runs the experiments in an isolated container, and validates
the generated results. The native ./run.sh workflow re-
mains available for compatible host environments. Manual
installation and troubleshooting instructions are provided in
artifact/INSTALL.md.
E. Suggested Experiment workflow
The command ./run-docker.sh is the recommended
evaluator workflow. It runs the portable experiment set and
regenerates the selected figures and tables. The key steps are:
• run ./run-docker.sh from the extracted archive root;


• confirm the final AE PASS and 21/21 stage summary;
• inspect
results/docker-ae/REPRODUCTION_
REPORT.md; and
• inspect
the
generated
PDFs
in
results/docker-ae/figures/
and
CSVs
in
results/docker-ae/tables/.
The native workflow instead writes to results/ae/. The
archive names the eight experimental PDFs to match Figures 12–
19 and regenerates Table III from the retained four-planner
traces. Fixed/model comparisons and separate sensitivity con-
figurations remain identified in the generated reports.
The optional paper-sample workflow is:
python3 artifact/reproduce.py \
--mode full --jobs 24 \
--output-dir results/full
Commercial re-synthesis and fresh execution of external
baselines are outside this workflow. Packaged fixed or modeled
inputs remain identified in the generated report.
F. Evaluation and expected results
A successful default run ends with:
AE PASS
Workflow stages: 21/21 passed
Generated figures: 8
Generated tables:
17
This confirms that the released software builds and runs
end-to-end, the five FMT*/software-Arborist workload pairs
satisfy the registered path-cost check, and the selected figures,
tables, and machine-readable outputs pass validation.
G. Experiment customization
The map, sample count, tree count, split threshold, look-
ahead depth, simulator settings, and output directory can
be changed. See artifact/CUSTOMIZATION.md and
artifact/REUSE.md for examples.
H. Methodology
Submission, reviewing, and badging methodology:
• https://www.acm.org/publications/policies/
artifact-review-and-badging-current
• https://cTuning.org/ae
References
[1] J. Wang, T. Zhang, N. Ma, Z. Li, H. Ma, F. Meng, and M. Q.-H. Meng,
“A survey of learning-based robot motion planning,” IET Cyber-Systems
and Robotics, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 302–314, 2021.
[2] C. Zhou, B. Huang, and P. Fr¨anti, “A review of motion planning algorithms
for intelligent robots,” Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, vol. 33, no. 2,
pp. 387–424, 2022.
[3] W. Schwarting, J. Alonso-Mora, and D. Rus, “Planning and decision-
making for autonomous vehicles,” Annual Review of Control, Robotics,
and Autonomous Systems, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 187–210, 2018.
[4] S. Teng, X. Hu, P. Deng, B. Li, Y. Li, Y. Ai, D. Yang, L. Li, Z. Xuanyuan,
F. Zhu et al., “Motion planning for autonomous driving: The state of the
art and future perspectives,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles,
vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 3692–3711, 2023.
[5] S. Kim, R. Hsiao, B. Nikolic, J. Demmel, and Y. S. Shao, “Supernova:
Algorithm-hardware co-design for resource-aware slam,” in Proceedings
of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1, 2025, pp.
1035–1051.
[6] Z. Wan, Y. Du, M. Ibrahim, J. Qian, J. Jabbour, Y. Zhao, T. Krishna,
A. Raychowdhury, and V. J. Reddi, “Reca: Integrated acceleration for
real-time and efficient cooperative embodied autonomous agents,” in
Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2,
2025, pp. 982–997.
[7] Y. Huang, Y. Hao, B. Yu, F. Yan, Y. Yang, F. Min, Y. Han, L. Ma,
S. Liu, Q. Liu et al., “Dadu-corki: Algorithm-architecture co-design for
embodied ai-powered robotic manipulation,” in Proceedings of the 52nd
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2025, pp.
327–343.
[8] B. Yu, W. Hu, L. Xu, J. Tang, S. Liu, and Y. Zhu, “Building the computing
system for autonomous micromobility vehicles: Design constraints and ar-
chitectural optimizations,” in 2020 53rd Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2020, pp. 1067–1081.
[9] C. R. de Lima, S. G. Khan, M. Tufail, S. H. Shah, and M. R. Maximo,
“Humanoid robot motion planning approaches: a survey,” Journal of
Intelligent & Robotic Systems, vol. 110, no. 2, p. 86, 2024.
[10] M. Ghafarian Tamizi, M. Yaghoubi, and H. Najjaran, “A review of recent
trend in motion planning of industrial robots,” International Journal of
Intelligent Robotics and Applications, vol. 7, pp. 253–274, Feb. 2023.
[11] S.
K.
Moore.
(2022,
Aug.)
3
new
chips
to
help
robots
find
their
way
around.
[Online].
Available:
https://spectrum.ieee.org/
3-new-chips-to-help-robots-find-their-way-around
[12] J. M. Levin, M. Nahon, and A. A. Paranjape, “Real-time motion planning
with a fixed-wing uav using an agile maneuver space,” Autonomous
Robots, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 2111–2130, Dec. 2019.
[13] S. Murray, W. Floyd-Jones, Y. Qi, D. J. Sorin, and G. D. Konidaris,
“Robot motion planning on a chip.” in Robotics: Science and Systems,
vol. 6, 2016.
[14] A.
Orthey,
C.
Chamzas,
and
L.
E.
Kavraki,
“Sampling-based
motion planning: A comparative review,” Annual Review of Control,
Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, vol. 7, pp. 285–310, 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://www.annualreviews.org/content/journals/10.
1146/annurev-control-061623-094742
[15] L. Kavraki, P. Svestka, J.-C. Latombe, and M. Overmars, “Probabilistic
roadmaps for path planning in high-dimensional configuration spaces,”
IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 566–
580, 1996.
[16] S. M. LaValle, “Rapidly-exploring random trees: A new tool for path
planning,” Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University, Tech.
Rep. 98-11, Oct. 1998. [Online]. Available: https://lavalle.pl/rrtpubs.html
[17] S. Karaman and E. Frazzoli, “Sampling-based algorithms for optimal
motion planning,” The international journal of robotics research, vol. 30,
no. 7, pp. 846–894, 2011.
[18] L. Janson, E. Schmerling, A. Clark, and M. Pavone, “Fast marching tree:
A fast marching sampling-based method for optimal motion planning
in many dimensions,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 883–921, 2015.
[19] J. A. Starek, J. V. Gomez, E. Schmerling, L. Janson, L. Moreno, and
M. Pavone, “An asymptotically-optimal sampling-based algorithm for bi-
directional motion planning,” in 2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 2072–2078.
[20] B. Ichter, E. Schmerling, and M. Pavone, “Group marching tree: Sampling-
based approximately optimal motion planning on gpus,” in 2017 First
IEEE International Conference on Robotic Computing (IRC), 2017, pp.
219–226.
[21] J. Xu, K. Song, D. Zhang, H. Dong, Y. Yan, and Q. Meng, “Informed
anytime fast marching tree for asymptotically optimal motion planning,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 5068–
5077, 2020.
[22] K. Wang, J. Xu, K. Song, Y. Yan, and Y. Peng, “Informed anytime bi-
directional fast marching tree for optimal motion planning in complex
cluttered environments,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 215, p.
119263, 2023.
[23] P. H. Exenberger Becker, F. Silfa, J. M. Arnau, and A. Gonzalez, “Caravan:
A hardware/software co-design for efficient simd neighbor search on point
clouds,” in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture, 2025, pp. 1079–1092.


[24] M. Bakhshalipour, S. B. Ehsani, M. Qadri, D. Guri, M. Likhachev, and P. B.
Gibbons, “Racod: algorithm/hardware co-design for mobile robot path
planning,” in Proceedings of the 49th Annual International Symposium
on Computer Architecture, 2022, pp. 597–609.
[25] P. E. Hart, N. J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael, “A formal basis for the heuristic
determination of minimum cost paths,” IEEE transactions on Systems
Science and Cybernetics, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 100–107, 1968.
[26] L. Huang, Y. Gong, Y. Sui, X. Zang, and B. Yuan, “Moped: Efficient
motion planning engine with flexible dimension support,” in 2024 IEEE
International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 483–497.
[27] J.-C. Latombe, Robot motion planning.
Springer Science & Business
Media, 2012, vol. 124.
[28] T. Lozano-Perez, “Spatial planning: A configuration space approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. C-32, no. 2, pp. 108–120, 1983.
[29] B. Donald, P. Xavier, J. Canny, and J. Reif, “Kinodynamic motion
planning,” J. ACM, vol. 40, no. 5, p. 1048–1066, Nov. 1993. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/174147.174150
[30] J. F. Canny, The complexity of robot motion planning.
Cambridge, MA,
USA: MIT Press, 1988.
[31] O. Khatib, “Real-time obstacle avoidance for manipulators and mo-
bile robots,” in Proceedings. 1985 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, vol. 2, 1985, pp. 500–505.
[32] D. Berenson, S. S. Srinivasa, D. Ferguson, and J. J. Kuffner, “Manip-
ulation planning on constraint manifolds,” in 2009 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2009, pp. 625–632.
[33] Y. Kuwata, J. Teo, G. Fiore, S. Karaman, E. Frazzoli, and J. P. How, “Real-
time motion planning with applications to autonomous urban driving,”
IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 17, no. 5, pp.
1105–1118, 2009.
[34] M. Turpin, N. Michael, and V. Kumar, “Concurrent assignment and
planning of trajectories for large teams of interchangeable robots,” in 2013
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2013, pp.
842–848.
[35] R. Allen and M. Pavone, “Toward a real-time framework for solving
the kinodynamic motion planning problem,” in 2015 IEEE international
conference on robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 928–
934.
[36] I. A. S¸ucan, M. Moll, and L. E. Kavraki, “The Open Motion Planning
Library,” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 19, no. 4, pp.
72–82, December 2012, https://ompl.kavrakilab.org.
[37] J. D. Gammell, S. S. Srinivasa, and T. D. Barfoot, “Batch informed
trees (bit*): Sampling-based optimal planning via the heuristically guided
search of implicit random geometric graphs,” in 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2015, pp. 3067–3074.
[38] S. Murray, W. Floyd-Jones, G. Konidaris, and D. J. Sorin, “A pro-
grammable architecture for robot motion planning acceleration,” in 2019
IEEE 30th International Conference on Application-specific Systems,
Architectures and Processors (ASAP), vol. 2160.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 185–
188.
[39] S. Lian, Y. Han, X. Chen, Y. Wang, and H. Xiao, “Dadu-p: A scalable
accelerator for robot motion planning in a dynamic environment,” in
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Design Automation Conference, 2018,
pp. 1–6.
[40] J. Li, Z. Chen, D. Harabor, P. J. Stuckey, and S. Koenig, “Anytime
multi-agent path finding via large neighborhood search,” in International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence 2021.
Association for the
Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2021, pp. 4127–4135.
[41] B. Zhou, F. Gao, J. Pan, and S. Shen, “Robust real-time uav replanning
using guided gradient-based optimization and topological paths,” in
2020 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1208–1214.
[42] A. Romero, R. Penicka, and D. Scaramuzza, “Time-optimal online
replanning for agile quadrotor flight,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 7730–7737, 2022.
[43] D. Palossi, “On the autonomous navigation of nano-uavs,” Ph.D. disserta-
tion, ETH Zurich, 2019.
[44] S. D. Pendleton, H. Andersen, X. Du, X. Shen, M. Meghjani, Y. H. Eng,
D. Rus, and M. H. Ang Jr, “Perception, planning, control, and coordination
for autonomous vehicles,” Machines, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 6, 2017.
[45] L. Huang, C. Yang, Y. Gong, Y. Sui, X. Zang, A. Goeckner, Q. Zhu,
and B. Yuan, “Algorithm and hardware co-design for energy-efficient
neural slam,” in Proceedings of the 61st ACM/IEEE Design Automation
Conference, 2024, pp. 1–4.
[46] C. Yu and S. Gao, “Reducing collision checking for sampling-based
motion planning using graph neural networks,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 4274–4289, 2021.
[47] B. Boroujerdian, H. Genc, S. Krishnan, W. Cui, A. Faust, and V. Reddi,
“Mavbench: Micro aerial vehicle benchmarking,” in 2018 51st annual
IEEE/ACM international symposium on microarchitecture (MICRO).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 894–907.
[48] Y. Kim, D. Shin, J. Lee, Y. Lee, and H.-J. Yoo, “A 0.55 v 1.1 mw artificial
intelligence processor with on-chip pvt compensation for autonomous
mobile robots,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular
Papers, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 567–580, 2018.
[49] Wikipedia
contributors,
“Minimum
spanning
tree
—
Wikipedia,
the
free
encyclopedia,”
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=
Minimum spanning tree&oldid=1317796852, 2025, [Online; accessed
14-November-2025].
[50] C. Eastman, “Optimal bucket size for nearest neighbor searching in
k-d trees,” Information Processing Letters, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 165–167,
1981. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/0020019081900922
[51] K. Zhou, Q. Hou, R. Wang, and B. Guo, “Real-time kd-tree construction
on graphics hardware,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 27,
no. 5, pp. 1–11, 2008.
[52] M. de Berg, O. Cheong, M. van Kreveld, and M. Overmars,
Orthogonal Range Searching.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 95–120. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-540-77974-2 5
[53] R. Pinkham, S. Zeng, and Z. Zhang, “QuickNN: Memory and
Performance
Optimization
of
k-d
Tree
Based
Nearest
Neighbor
Search
for
3D
Point
Clouds,”
in
2020
IEEE
International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA),
Feb. 2020, pp. 180–192, iSSN: 2378-203X. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9065602
[54] T. Xu, B. Tian, and Y. Zhu, “Tigris: Architecture and algorithms for
3d perception in point clouds,” in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture. ACM, 2019,
pp. 629–642.
[55] J. L. Bentley, Programming Pearls, 2nd ed.
Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley Professional, 1999.
[56] R. Ausavarungnirun, K. K.-W. Chang, L. Subramanian, G. H. Loh, and
O. Mutlu, “Staged memory scheduling: Achieving high performance
and scalability in heterogeneous systems,” ACM SIGARCH Computer
Architecture News, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 416–427, 2012.
[57] J.
A.
Sethian,
“Fast
marching
methods:
A
boundary-value
formulation,” Online educational material, 2006, accessed: 2025-
11-17.
[Online].
Available:
https://math.berkeley.edu/∼sethian/2006/
Explanations/fast marching explain.html
[58] M. Bakhshalipour, M. Likhachev, and P. B. Gibbons, “Rtrbench: A
benchmark suite for real-time robotics,” in 2022 IEEE International
Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS),
2022, pp. 175–186.
[59] N. Sturtevant, “Benchmarks for grid-based pathfinding,” Transactions on
Computational Intelligence and AI in Games, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 144 –
148, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://web.cs.du.edu/∼sturtevant/papers/
benchmarks.pdf
[60] A. Hornung, K. M. Wurm, M. Bennewitz, C. Stachniss, and W. Burgard,
“Octomap: an efficient probabilistic 3d mapping framework based on
octrees,” Auton. Robots, vol. 34, no. 3, p. 189–206, Apr. 2013. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-012-9321-0
[61] S. Sarangi and B. Baas, “Deepscaletool: A tool for the accurate estimation
of technology scaling in the deep-submicron era,” in 2021 IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS).
Ieee, 2021, pp.
1–5.
[62] S. Murray, W. Floyd-Jones, Y. Qi, G. Konidaris, and D. J. Sorin, “The mi-
croarchitecture of a real-time robot motion planning accelerator,” in 2016
49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–12.
[63] D. Shah, N. Yang, and T. M. Aamodt, “Energy-efficient realtime motion
planning,” in Proceedings of the 50th Annual International Symposium
on Computer Architecture, 2023, pp. 1–17.
[64] Y. Hao, Y. Gan, B. Yu, Q. Liu, S.-S. Liu, and Y. Zhu, “Blitzcrank: Factor
graph accelerator for motion planning,” in 2023 60th ACM/IEEE Design
Automation Conference (DAC).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–6.


[65] Y. Yang, X. Chen, and Y. Han, “Dadu-cd: Fast and efficient processing-
in-memory accelerator for collision detection,” in 2020 57th ACM/IEEE
Design Automation Conference (DAC).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[66] J. A. Sethian, “A fast marching level set method for monotonically
advancing fronts.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, vol. 93, no. 4, pp. 1591–1595, 1996.
[67] Y. Feng, G. Hammonds, Y. Gan, and Y. Zhu, “Crescent: taming memory
irregularities for accelerating deep point cloud analytics,” in Proceedings
of the 49th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture,
2022, pp. 962–977.
