Agent as Policy
AGENT AS POLICY FOR ROBOTIC MANIPULATION
Mengzhao Jia1,*
Yang Lin2,*
Xixin Zhang3,*
Zhihan Zhang1
Xiaobai Liu3
Meng Jiang1
1University of Notre Dame
2University of California San Diego
3San Diego State University
*Core contributors
1mjia2@nd.edu
ABSTRACT
We demonstrate that a general-purpose agent can directly drive a physical robot
throughout task execution without any task-specific or environment-specific train-
ing. We introduce Agent as Policy (AGP), which places task planning and ex-
ecution under the agent’s control. Given a task and a robot interface, the agent
interprets visual evidence, writes executable programs, issues motion commands,
and revises its actions in response to physical outcomes. This brings the agent’s
reasoning and programming capabilities into continuous interaction with the physi-
cal world. We study AGP across multiple real-world manipulation tasks spanning
precision manipulation, dynamic motions, and deformable objects. These include
assembly from human videos, block construction from goal images, die reorienta-
tion, targeted throwing, and bimanual towel folding. AGP achieves success rates of
100%, 100%, and 80% on three block construction configurations. These findings
establish a path for general-purpose agents to act as robot policies, extending their
autonomy to physical manipulation through runtime reasoning, programming, and
interaction.
1
INTRODUCTION
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) demonstrate strong general capabilities (Li et al.,
2026b). Agents built on these models tackle digital tasks such as software development and computer
use (Yang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024). Recent work extends these agents to
robot manipulation, bringing their task execution capabilities from digital environments into the
physical world (Li et al., 2026a; Zhang et al., 2026; Galanti et al., 2026). These agentic robot systems
broadly follow two approaches. The first approach uses agents to generate executable programs in
advance, expressed as code or computation graphs that the robot runs during task execution (Liang
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2026). The second approach uses agents as orchestrators of existing learned
policies, selecting and sequencing these policies according to task goals and execution feedback (Li
et al., 2026a; Zhang et al., 2026; Galanti et al., 2026). Both approaches, however, have limitations.
Generated programs must express runtime decisions through explicit rules, making it difficult to
anticipate how uncertain observations and unexpected outcomes should affect execution. Policy
orchestration gives agents control over which policy runs next, while motion generation remains
limited by what the selected policies can perform.
Yet physical tasks often require the flexibility to adapt both how evidence is interpreted and how
actions are generated. After a failed insertion, for example, the robot may need a closer view, a revised
alignment estimate, or a different approach direction. Choosing and carrying out the appropriate
response requires reasoning jointly about the current scene, the attempted motion, and its outcome.
To this end, we introduce Agent as Policy (AGP), which uses the agent itself as the policy throughout
task execution. We grant the agent full autonomy over runtime task decisions: it decides what to
observe, how to interpret evidence, and which motion to request, and can author and revise local
programs as needed. Each result informs the next decision, including whether to gather more evidence
or change the execution strategy. This gives the agent control over perception, motion generation,
and recovery at the level where new physical evidence becomes available.
1
arXiv:2609.12541v1  [cs.CL]  11 Sep 2026


Agent as Policy
(a) Tasks
Video guided
assembly
Image guided
construction
Dice
reorientation
Targeted
throwing
Bimanual
towel folding
Eight parts · Four pairs
Six blocks → pyramid
Set all six with 5 up
Potato into bowl
Two arms + towel
Long Horizon Reasoning · Visual Instruction
Action Diversity · Language Instruction
Deformable Objects
(b) Agent as Policy
1  Task preparation Once per task type
User request
Video / image / language
Preparation agent
Reads task requirements
Task definition
Goal, constraints, criteria
Current instance
+ robot interface docs
2  Task execution
Execution agent
Creates&Selects tools for the current task
Examples
3D localization
Images + depth
Object position
Pose planning
Object geometry
Gripper pose
Executable code
Python + libraries
Move + inspect
New observations guide the next estimate and action
Robot interface
Observation 
Action Requests
Images, state, errors
Robot + controller
IK for pose targets
Trajectory + feedback
Runtime
Figure 1: Overview of AGP. (a) Evaluated tasks include video guided assembly, image guided
construction, die reorientation, targeted throwing, and bimanual towel folding. (b) A preparation
agent creates a reusable task definition. At runtime, the execution agent writes and selects programs to
interpret observations, compute motion targets, and request robot actions through the robot interface.
After each action, the agent uses motion feedback and new observations to refine its estimates and
adjust subsequent actions.
We implement AGP by connecting a general purpose coding agent to the robot through a bridge
that exposes calibrated observations, geometric queries, and motion commands (Figure 1). The
coding agent provides the programming tools and persistent workspace used to create scripts, inspect
data, and retain execution evidence. Through these tools, it can compute object geometry, evaluate
candidate motions, and revise action sequences using feedback from the robot. The bridge grounds
these computations in camera calibration and robot coordinates, validates requested motion, and
returns measured state and execution reports. It also supports coordinated joint and gripper motion
for actions that depend on timing. Motion execution and monitoring run independently of agent
inference, allowing the robot to execute a submitted motion while the agent reasons between tool
calls. Adaptation occurs through updated measurements, programs, and decisions within the session,
with model parameters fixed throughout execution.
We evaluate AGP directly on real robots through assembly from human videos, block construction
from goal images, die reorientation, targeted throwing, and bimanual towel folding. In the main
evaluation, each trial starts in a fresh session with fixed model weights and no prior task execution
experience or simulation rehearsal. AGP achieves success rates of at least 80% in seven of eight task
configurations, including 14 of 15 successful trials across three block construction configurations and
5 of 5 on die reorientation. Across configurations, mean completion time for successful trials ranges
from 20.6 to 54.3 minutes, with mean inference costs from USD 7.46 to USD 27.41 per successful
trial. We also explore experience reuse across two assembly tasks and observe that its benefits for
task execution time vary by task.
This work provides evidence that general purpose foundation MLLMs can serve as policies for
direct robot arm control through a robot interface. Their visual perception and reasoning capabilities
support interpreting task goals, generating motions, and adapting to physical feedback during zero
shot manipulation. The substantial execution time and inference cost remain barriers to practical de-
ployment. We hope this study provides insights for future research on using the powerful capabilities
of foundation MLLMs for more capable and efficient robot manipulation.
2


Agent as Policy
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
AGENTIC ROBOT SYSTEMS
Agentic robot systems use language models for reasoning, tool use, and adaptation through execution
feedback, with two main roles for the agent. Program synthesis and refinement. One line generates
programs that map observations to actions through perception and control interfaces, with validation
supporting execution in simulation and on physical robots (Singh et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2024; Mu et al., 2024). Recent work uses execution evidence to iteratively refine programs or
computation graphs and retain reusable solutions (Lu et al., 2026). AGP keeps a runtime agent in the
decision loop during deployment, allowing it to choose new approaches, write new programs, and
revise workflows based on observations and execution feedback. Runtime policy orchestration. A
second line selects and sequences learned skills according to task goals, affordances, and environment
feedback (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022). Recent systems extend this approach to vision
language action (VLA) policies with progress monitoring and recovery (Li et al., 2026a; Zhang et al.,
2026; Galanti et al., 2026). These systems separate skill selection from motion generation within
the invoked policy or primitive. AGP uses the runtime agent itself as the policy without a separately
trained action policy, enabling zero shot task execution in previously unseen environments.
2.2
ROBOT MANIPULATION
Classical robot manipulation combines geometric modeling, task and motion planning, and feedback
control (Garrett et al., 2021). Learned visuomotor policies predict actions from robot trajectory data,
with diffusion models capturing action sequences (Chi et al., 2023). Vision language action models
extend this approach to diverse tasks through image and language conditioning (Brohan et al., 2023;
Kim et al., 2024; Black et al., 2024). Video and world action models further couple actions with
future visual states to inform action generation and evaluation (Li et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2026). AGP
introduces an alternative to policies trained specifically for action generation by using a general
purpose foundation multimodal large language model (MLLM) directly as the robot policy.
2.3
AGENTIC WORKFLOWS BEYOND ROBOTICS
Language agents combine reasoning, tool use, and reflection on interaction feedback (Yao et al.,
2022; Schick et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023). Coding agents apply these mechanisms to editing
and testing software (Yang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024), while computer use agents act through
browser and desktop interfaces, adapting to interface changes (Zhou et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2024).
Multiagent frameworks distribute workflows among specialized roles that communicate and share
intermediate results (Wu et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2023). These workflows establish mechanisms
for tool use, memory, feedback, and coordination. AGP studies how they shape the robot policy
boundary, with agents governing physical task execution through perception, geometry, planning, and
control interfaces.
3
A GENERAL PURPOSE AGENT AS THE ROBOT POLICY
3.1
PROBLEM FORMULATION
Task objective. We consider physical manipulation tasks specified through video instructions, image
instructions, language instructions, or a combination of these. A robot operates in a persistent scene,
and the objective is to bring that scene into a state satisfying the task criteria within fixed budgets for
elapsed time and observation and action requests.
Task preparation. When a task type is first introduced to the system, a separate coding agent prepares
a reusable task definition from the user’s request. This agent runs only during task preparation. A
different agent, the execution agent, carries out the task at runtime. This definition specifies the goal,
reference materials, constraints, allowed variations, and completion criteria, along with interface
access rules, budgets, and reporting requirements. For subsequent instances of an existing task type,
a launch program starts the execution agent directly with the saved definition and the current instance
details. The execution agent reads the supplied materials and carries out the requested instance.
3


Agent as Policy
Agent as the robot policy. We use a general purpose agent as the robot policy. The agent receives a
task specification g, including the prompt and reference materials, and a documented robot interface
I. It maintains a local workspace W containing scripts, notes, and observations collected during
execution. The agent interprets the task, plans actions, and interacts with the robot through tools. We
describe its tool selection process as
uk ∼πθ( · | g, I, Hk, Wk),
(1)
where uk is the tool call selected at step k, Hk contains the conversation and tool results available
at that step, and Wk contains the current workspace files. A tool call may acquire information or
execute a program that submits action targets to the robot controller. The model parameters θ remain
fixed throughout execution.
3.2
AGENT TO ROBOT BRIDGE
The robot interface I supports information exchange in two directions. The robot provides camera
observations and proprioceptive state to the agent. The agent sends requests for observations or
actions through this interface. Together, these exchanges allow the agent to observe the scene, direct
physical actions, and assess the resulting state.
Robot to agent. The interface provides two sources of information. Cameras supply overhead
images for a view of the scene and wrist images with aligned depth for closer inspection and spatial
measurement. Camera calibration and poses relate these observations to a shared robot coordinate
frame. The robot’s state interface supplies joint positions from motor feedback and the corresponding
end effector pose computed through forward kinematics. This proprioceptive state describes the
robot’s current configuration and supports comparison with commanded targets. After a motion, the
interface returns the available updated state and target errors computed from this state. Observations
are saved in the agent’s workspace for visual inspection and programmatic processing.
Agent to robot. The agent sends requests through the interface. These include observation requests,
which ask the robot system to capture images or report its state, and action requests, which specify
arm movements or gripper opening and closing. For arm movement, the agent chooses between
specifying target joint angles and specifying a target end effector position and orientation. The latter
describes where to place the gripper and how to orient it. Gripper requests separately specify how
far the fingers should open or close. To carry out these requests, the robot uses a controller to turn
the agent’s targets into commands that drive its joints and gripper. For end effector targets, it uses
Mink (Zakka, 2026) for inverse kinematics to compute joint targets. It then generates joint trajectories
subject to workspace and motion limits and uses motor feedback to track them. Between requests, the
controller maintains the arm’s posture while the agent reasons about its next step. Motion commands
execute in order for each arm, and commands to different arms can proceed concurrently.
3.3
RUNTIME PROGRAMMING AND EXECUTION
Runtime programming. The agent writes programs during execution to interpret observations,
compute action targets, and submit them through the robot interface. It can inspect reference videos
and camera images and process saved data with Python and available libraries. For example, it can
estimate an object’s position from camera observations and depth measurements, compute a target
gripper pose, and issue the corresponding robot commands. Appendix E analyzes recorded programs
for geometric estimation, visual processing, and robot call composition.
Feedback and adaptation. After executing an action, the agent uses motion feedback and new
observations to revise its estimates and subsequent actions. For example, an unsuccessful insertion
can prompt a new alignment estimate and a modified approach. The agent determines grasp poses,
action sequences, observation timing, and recovery during this cycle. It continues until it reports
completion or ends the attempt within the task budget. Physical success is assessed against the task
criteria using the resulting scene and recorded evidence.
Execution efficiency. To reduce tool overhead, we instruct the agent to wait longer for completed
action results and to combine consecutive operations, such as moving the arm and then capturing and
displaying an image, in one tool call. These instructions are enabled according to the experimental
condition.
4


Agent as Policy
4
EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate AGP on real-world robot tasks spanning long horizon reasoning, action diversity, and
object diversity under video, image, and language instructions. We assess success rate, completion
time, token usage, and inference cost, then examine whether accumulated experience improves
execution efficiency.
4.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
4.1.1
ROBOT PLATFORM AND AGENT CONFIGURATION
Robot Platform. We use an I2RT YAM (I2RT) arm with six revolute joints and a parallel gripper in
a tabletop workspace. The free_agent runtime provides the robot interface described in Section 3.2.
Bimanual towel folding uses two arm servers with a common coordinate frame and coordination
selected by the agent. The archived throwing case uses a separate interface with timed motion
programs, documented in Appendix A.1.
Cameras. A wrist mounted Intel RealSense D405 provides aligned RGB and depth at 640 × 360
pixels. A fixed overhead Logitech BRIO provides rectified RGB at 1920×1080 pixels. Both cameras
capture at 30 frames per second, and the agent requests observations on demand.
Model Configuration. GPT-6 Astra (OpenAI, b) at high thinking effort is the default across all
four task groups. A separate study varies the model and thinking effort on a two pair assembly task.
Model weights remain fixed. Appendix A gives platform, agent, and model configuration details.
4.1.2
TASKS AND EVALUATION
Capability Driven Task Design. We find that conventional pick and place tasks, such as placing
an object into a bowl, pose little challenge for AGP, motivating more demanding tasks to evaluate
its capabilities. We use four task groups. Assembly of eight parts into four pairs from a human
video and block construction from goal images test long horizon reasoning under video and image
instructions, respectively. Both require interpreting visual relationships and ordering operations while
preserving earlier progress. The assembly parts are adapted from the AutoMate dataset (Tang et al.,
2024). Block targets comprise a pyramid, two towers, and a six block tower. Die flipping requires
reorienting six randomly placed dice so that all six show the requested number on their upward faces.
Die flipping and targeted throwing follow language instructions and test action diversity through
grasp dependent reorientation and timed release during a circular swing. Bimanual towel folding
follows video instructions and tests object diversity through coordinated manipulation of deformable
material. Appendix B.1 gives the design rationale, task definitions, and success criteria.
Trial Protocol. Trials use predefined initial scenes and fixed budgets for elapsed time and observation
and action requests. Model and experience comparisons use matched scenes and counterbalanced
execution order. Recovery is permitted within these budgets. A reset or human intervention ends the
autonomous trial. Physical outcomes and execution video determine success using predefined criteria.
Appendix B.2 gives the detailed protocol.
Metrics. Table 1 reports AGP success rates and resource use across tasks. Time is the mean elapsed
minutes from task delivery to final physical verification over successful trials, with the observed
minimum and maximum shown below the mean. Tokens reports mean total input and output usage
over successful trials in thousands, with the observed minimum and maximum below, including
reasoning tokens and retries. Block construction and towel folding report success rate, completion
time, token usage, and model inference cost separately for each equally sampled configuration.
Appendix B.3 defines accounting, partial completion measures, and uncertainty estimates.
4.2
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
4.2.1
MAIN RESULTS
Table 1 summarizes AGP success rates, completion times, token usage, and inference costs across
the manipulation tasks. The results yield three main observations. Strong zero shot performance.
AGP achieves success rates of at least 80% in seven of eight task configurations, with 100% observed
5


Agent as Policy
Table 1: Main results across manipulation tasks. Success is reported as the number of successful
trials over the total number of trials (n/N). Time, tokens, and cost summarize successful trials, with
means above [min, max]. Cost uses Standard API rates and accounts for cache hits through cached
input pricing. † Throwing time includes subsequent motion trajectory analysis and verification.
The throw itself is completed an average of 13.9 minutes after task delivery. Tags denote long
horizon reasoning (LHR), action diversity (AD), object diversity (OD), video instruction (Vid), image
instruction (Img), and language instruction (Lan).
Task
Capability
Instruction
Success
Time ↓
Tokens ↓
Cost ↓
(n/N)
(min)
(k)
(USD)
Four pair assembly
LHR
Vid
4/5
54.3
[38.6, 78.2]
22255
[12838, 42988]
27.41
[16.92, 49.88]
Block construction
LHR
Img
Pyramid
5/5
22.8
[14.9, 32.2]
9069
[6267, 12937]
11.56
[8.01, 15.28]
Two towers
5/5
21.4
[14.8, 29.2]
8332
[4944, 14390]
10.28
[6.27, 16.85]
Six block tower
4/5
34.7
[17.3, 55.0]
13111
[5086, 19846]
17.35
[6.69, 26.78]
Die flipping
AD
Lan
5/5
42.9
[22.6, 56.0]
18460
[10158, 25000]
22.52
[12.57, 31.20]
Targeted throwing
AD
Lan
Potato
2/2
22.8†
[22.2, 23.3]
6256
[6254, 6257]
8.94
[8.71, 9.18]
Towel folding
OD
Vid
Sequential
5/5
50.8
[33.8, 63.3]
18123
[10126, 25262]
24.14
[14.16, 30.90]
Simultaneous
3/5
21.4
[15.7, 31.2]
5055
[4270, 5684]
7.46
[6.16, 8.67]
success in five. These results support its effectiveness for zero shot manipulation across the evaluated
tasks. Task complexity and execution overhead. Execution time and inference cost generally
increase with task complexity, as illustrated by the six block tower relative to the pyramid and two
towers. Execution overhead also includes reviewing actions and verifying outcomes. In potato
throwing, the throw is completed after 13.9 minutes on average, while subsequent trajectory analysis
and verification account for approximately 40% of the reported 22.8 minutes. Challenges in
deformable object manipulation. Deformable object manipulation remains challenging. Sequential
towel folding succeeds in all five trials but requires 50.8 minutes and USD 24.14 on average, among
the highest expenditures in the task suite. Simultaneous folding, whose demonstration brings both
short ends inward together, has the lowest observed success rate at 3/5, highlighting the challenge of
coordinating dynamic manipulation of deformable material.
4.2.2
AGENT AND THINKING EFFORT COMPARISON
Table 2 compares agent and model configurations on two pair assembly from a human demonstration.
The task pairs a hexagonal ring with a short post and a circular sleeve with a stepped cylinder. Within
Codex (OpenAI, a), we evaluate GPT-6 Astra at low, medium, and high thinking effort and GPT-5.6
Sol, Terra, and Luna (OpenAI, c) at high thinking effort. The comparison also includes Claude
Code (Anthropic, a) with Claude Opus 5 (Anthropic, 2026) and Claude Fable 5.1, both at high effort.
Task references, robot functions, and trial budgets are shared across configurations.
AGP supports successful assembly across both Codex and Claude Code, while the performance
differences among models within each agent show that model choice remains important. Astra
maintains consistent success across thinking effort levels, suggesting limited benefit from additional
thinking effort on this task. Sol offers lower inference cost with longer execution time than Astra.
Within Claude Code, Fable achieves lower success than Opus and uses fewer tokens on successful
trials, yet incurs greater time and cost.
6


Agent as Policy
Table 2: Agent and thinking effort comparison on two pair assembly. GPT-6 Astra is reported at
low, medium, and high effort as separate rows. Other models use high effort. Aggregation follows
Table 1. Success is reported as the number of successful trials over the total number of trials (n/N).
Model versions, native effort settings, and agent versions are recorded before collection.
Model
Success
Time ↓
Tokens ↓
Cost ↓
(n/N)
(min)
(k)
(USD)
Codex
GPT-6 Astra
Low effort
5/5
9.9
[6.0, 19.0]
3689
[1438, 7720]
4.79
[2.15, 9.56]
Medium effort
5/5
9.2
[6.3, 15.4]
3025
[1842, 5801]
4.09
[2.76, 7.48]
High effort
5/5
9.2
[7.9, 10.6]
3300
[2584, 4024]
4.47
[3.72, 5.19]
GPT-5.6 Sol
5/5
14.2
[9.1, 19.3]
7128
[4118, 9718]
3.94
[2.40, 5.30]
GPT-5.6 Terra
1/5
19.0
[19.0, 19.0]
6282
[6282, 6282]
1.98
[1.98, 1.98]
GPT-5.6 Luna
0/5
–
–
–
Claude Code
Claude Opus 5
5/5
22.2
[14.4, 31.9]
12398
[9050, 16725]
9.75
[6.94, 13.03]
Claude Fable 5.1
3/5
27.7
[18.3, 39.8]
9266
[6874, 11100]
11.30
[8.33, 14.36]
4.3
IMPROVING EFFICIENCY THROUGH EXPERIENCE
We study whether saved task experience can improve efficiency in two ways. First, can the agent
reduce execution time over repeated runs by accumulating experience? Second, can this experience
help a smaller, more economical agent complete the same task? Both studies use the free_agent
runtime with fixed model weights. Experience is retained as files that a fresh agent context can
inspect and reuse. A detailed runtime breakdown of the evaluated trials is provided in Appendix D.1.
4.3.1
ACCUMULATING REUSABLE TASK EXPERIENCE
1
2
3
4
5
Cycle
0
8
16
Time (min)
(a) Ring
1
2
3
4
5
Cycle
0
5
10
(b) Two pairs
Total
Task
Experience
Figure 2: Experience reuse across two tasks.
Time includes task execution and experience
writing. Totals include handoffs for ring cycles
and within trial overhead for two pair assembly.
Appendix D.2 defines the boundaries.
People build experience through repeated task exe-
cution, retaining successful procedures and lessons
from mistakes that can make later attempts more
efficient. Persistent memory has been used to carry
execution feedback across trials (Shinn et al., 2023).
Motivated by this process, we investigate whether
an agent can improve its efficiency by accumulating
and reusing task experience.
We evaluate two tasks with five executions each us-
ing GPT-6 Astra at high thinking effort. One repeat-
edly disassembles and reassembles a ridged ring and
its base. The other assembles a hexagonal ring onto
a narrow post and a circular collar onto a stepped
cylinder. Each task uses a fixed robot and execution
configuration. Every execution starts with a fresh
agent context, beginning with empty experience and
subsequently reusing and updating saved measure-
ments, procedures, corrections, and scripts.
Figure 2 shows that the benefit of experience reuse
varies by task. Ring disassembly and reassembly becomes faster after the first cycle and remains near
that lower task time. In two pair assembly, task time fluctuates and returns close to its starting value,
7


Agent as Policy
while experience writing becomes shorter overall. These observations suggest that accumulated
experience can improve execution efficiency on some tasks, with limited gains in task execution on
others. Appendix D.2 provides the timing breakdown.
4.3.2
TRANSFERRING EXPERIENCE TO A SMALLER AGENT
No
Yes
No
Yes
Astra experience
0
10
20
Time (min)
19.0
10.2
0
2
4
6
8
Tokens (M)
6.28
4.36
Figure 3: Transferring Astra experience to
Terra. Mean completion time on the left axis
and token usage on the right axis are computed
over successful trials, following Table 2.
We evaluate whether experience collected by GPT-
6 Astra improves GPT-5.6 Terra on the two pair
assembly task in Table 2. Success requires both
demonstrated pairings to remain engaged and stable
after release.
Astra saves geometry, procedures, corrections, and
scripts over five executions.
Terra receives this
frozen collection with read access only, and the ex-
perience remains fixed across trials. We compare
Terra with empty experience and with Astra expe-
rience. Both conditions use fresh agent contexts,
high thinking effort, and the task references, robot
interface, and trial budgets of Table 2.
Success increases from 1/5 with empty experience
to 2/5 with Astra experience. Figure 3 shows shorter
completion time and lower token usage among suc-
cessful executions with transferred experience. These observations suggest that saved experience can
support transfer across models, although the small number of successful trials limits the strength of
this conclusion.
5
CONCLUSION
We introduced AGP, which uses a general purpose agent as the robot policy. Through runtime
programming and a robot interface, the agent interprets observations, generates motion requests, and
revises its actions using physical feedback. Real robot experiments evaluate long horizon reasoning,
action diversity, and object diversity under video, image, and language instructions. The results
support AGP’s ability to carry out diverse manipulation tasks. Experience reuse shows varying
benefits for task execution time across the two assembly tasks. Execution time, inference cost, and
reliability in coordinated deformable object manipulation remain key challenges. These results
support general purpose agents as a viable approach to robot control through reasoning, programming,
and physical interaction.
AI USE STATEMENT
During the preparation of this manuscript, the authors used generative AI tools to assist with drafting
and language editing, including refining sentence structure and improving clarity and readability.
The authors are responsible for reviewing and revising the resulting text to ensure that it accurately
represents the research. The authors take full responsibility for the content of the manuscript,
including the methodology, experimental results, interpretations, and conclusions.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
Section 3 describes the agent formulation, robot interface, and runtime execution procedure. Sec-
tion 4.1 summarizes the experimental setup, with robot hardware, control parameters, and agent
configurations detailed in Appendix A. Appendix B describes the tasks, reference materials, success
criteria, trial protocol, and metric definitions. The assembly parts are adapted from the AutoMate
dataset (Tang et al., 2024), as described in Appendix B.1. Appendix C explains the archived agent
comparison and its usage and cost accounting. Appendix D documents the execution time analysis
and repeated execution study, including experience checkpoints and timing boundaries. Appendix F
presents visual references and representative execution sequences.
8


Agent as Policy
REFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in
robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Anthropic. Claude Code overview. https://code.claude.com/docs/en/overview, a.
Accessed September 8, 2026.
Anthropic.
Claude Code model configuration.
https://code.claude.com/docs/en/
model-config, b. Accessed September 8, 2026.
Anthropic.
Claude Opus 5 system card.
https://www-cdn.anthropic.com/
b514064af1408018e64b1ad24e7d5e75850b4ffd/Claude%20Opus%205%
20System%20Card.pdf, 2026. Accessed September 8, 2026.
Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general
robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164, 2024.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, et al. RT-2: Vision-language-action models transfer
web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
Junting Chen, Yao Mu, Qiaojun Yu, Tianming Wei, Silang Wu, Zhecheng Yuan, Zhixuan Liang,
Chao Yang, Kaipeng Zhang, Wenqi Shao, Yu Qiao, Huazhe Xu, Mingyu Ding, and Ping Luo.
RoboScript: Code generation for free-form manipulation tasks across real and simulation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.14623, 2024.
Kaiyuan Chen, Shuangyu Xie, Letian Fu, Justin Yu, William Pacini, Sandeep Bajamahal, Hudson Kim,
Jaimyn Drake, Daehwa Kim, Haoru Xue, Jonathan Francis, Christian Juette, Muhammet Yunus
Seker, Ruwan Wickramarachchi, Uksang Yoo, Guanzhi Wang, Adithyavairavan Murali, Balakumar
Sundaralingam, S. Shankar Sastry, Spencer Huang, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Ken Goldberg. GaP:
A graph-as-policy multi-agent self-learning harness for variational automation tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2607.05369, 2026.
Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake,
and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.04137, 2023.
Liane Galanti, Dhruv Shah, and Tri Dao. Addressing the orchestration gap in generalist robots via
physical agency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.21725, 2026.
Caelan Reed Garrett, Rohan Chitnis, Rachel Holladay, Beomjoon Kim, Tom Silver, Leslie Pack
Kaelbling, and Tomás Lozano-Pérez.
Integrated task and motion planning.
Annual Re-
view of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 4:265–293, 2021.
doi:
10.1146/
annurev-control-091420-084139.
Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiaqi Chen, et al. MetaGPT: Meta programming for a multi-agent
collaborative framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00352, 2023.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through planning
with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022.
I2RT. I2RT robot software and YAM platform. https://github.com/i2rt-robotics/
i2rt. Accessed September 8, 2026.
Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, et al. OpenVLA: An open-source vision-language-
action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
Ruiying Li, Yunlang Zhou, YuYao Zhu, Kylin Chen, Jingyuan Wang, Sukai Wang, Kongtao Hu,
Minhui Yu, Bowen Jiang, Zhan Su, Jiayao Ma, Xin He, Yongjian Shen, Yang Yang, Guanghui
Ren, Maoqing Yao, Wenhao Wang, and Yao Mu. RoboClaw: An agentic framework for scalable
long-horizon robotic tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.11558, 2026a.
Shuang Li, Yihuai Gao, Dorsa Sadigh, and Shuran Song. Unified video action model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.00200, 2025.
9


Agent as Policy
Zongxia Li, Xiyang Wu, Hongyang Du, Fuxiao Liu, Huy Nghiem, and Guangyao Shi. A survey
of state of the art large vision language models: Alignment, benchmark, evaluations and chal-
lenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.02189v7, 2026b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.
02189v7. Revised August 22, 2026.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.07753, 2022.
Runyu Lu, Yubo Wu, Ethan Kou, Letian Fu, Wenli Xiao, Ajay Mandlekar, Yinzhen Xu, Guanya
Shi, Ken Goldberg, Ang Chen, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Guanzhi Wang.
ASPIRE: Agentic /skills discovery for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.00272, 2026.
Yao Mu, Junting Chen, Qing-Long Zhang, Shoufa Chen, Qiaojun Yu, Chongjian Ge, Runjian Chen,
Zhixuan Liang, Mengkang Hu, Chaofan Tao, Peize Sun, Haibao Yu, Chao Yang, Wenqi Shao,
Wenhai Wang, Jifeng Dai, Yu Qiao, Mingyu Ding, and Ping Luo. RoboCodeX: Multimodal code
generation for robotic behavior synthesis. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 36434–36454.
PMLR, 2024.
OpenAI. Codex CLI. https://learn.chatgpt.com/docs/codex/cli, a. Accessed
September 8, 2026.
OpenAI. GPT-6 Astra model. https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/models/
gpt-6-astra, b. Accessed September 8, 2026.
OpenAI.
OpenAI model catalog.
https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/
models/all, c. Accessed September 8, 2026.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.
Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. ProgPrompt: Generating situated robot task plans using
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11302, 2022.
Bingjie Tang, Iretiayo Akinola, Jie Xu, Bowen Wen, Ankur Handa, Karl Van Wyk, Dieter Fox,
Gaurav S. Sukhatme, Fabio Ramos, and Yashraj Narang. AutoMate: Specialist and generalist
assembly policies over diverse geometries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08028, 2024.
Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan,
Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng,
Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin, Robert
Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. OpenHands: An open platform for AI software
developers as generalist agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16741, 2024.
Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, et al. AutoGen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via
multi-agent conversation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155, 2023.
Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing
Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, Yitao Liu, Yiheng Xu, Shuyan Zhou, Silvio
Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Tao Yu. OSWorld: Benchmarking multimodal agents
for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07972, 2024.
John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan,
and Ofir Press. SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15793, 2024.
10


Agent as Policy
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
2022.
Seonghyeon Ye, Yunhao Ge, Kaiyuan Zheng, Shenyuan Gao, Sihyun Yu, George Kurian, Suneel
Indupuru, You Liang Tan, Chuning Zhu, Jiannan Xiang, et al. World action models are zero-shot
policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15922, 2026.
Kevin Zakka. Mink: Python inverse kinematics based on MuJoCo. https://github.com/
kevinzakka/mink, 2026.
Yixian Zhang, Huanming Zhang, Feng Gao, Xiao Li, Zhihao Liu, Yi Nie, Chunyang Zhu, Jiaxing Qiu,
Yuchen Yan, Jiyuan Liu, Wenhao Tang, Jiaji Rao, Zhengru Fang, Changxu Wei, Yu Wang, Wenbo
Ding, and Chao Yu. Harness VLA: Steering frozen VLAs into reliable manipulation primitives via
memory-guided agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.08448, 2026.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. WebArena: A realistic
web environment for building autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023.
11


Agent as Policy
Contents of Appendix
A Implementation Details
13
A.1
Robot Platform and Control Interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
A.2
Agent Configuration and Execution Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
A.3
Model and Reasoning Effort Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
B
Tasks and Evaluation Protocol
14
B.1
Task Definitions and Success Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
B.2
Trial Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
B.3
Metric Definitions and Resource Accounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
C Supplementary Coding Agent Comparison on Pyramid Construction
17
D Efficiency and Experience Reuse Analysis
18
D.1
Task Execution Time Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
D.2
Repeated Execution with Persistent Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
E
Runtime Program Analysis
21
F
Qualitative Task Examples
22
F.1
Four Pair Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
F.2
Block Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
F.3
Die Flipping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
F.4
Targeted Throwing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
F.5
Bimanual Towel Folding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
G Execution Across Arm and End Effector Embodiments
32
H Error and Recovery Study
34
H.1
Six Block Tower Collapse During Withdrawal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
I
Broader Impact
35
12


Agent as Policy
A
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
A.1
ROBOT PLATFORM AND CONTROL INTERFACE
This subsection details the robot platform introduced in Section 4.1.1 and the observation and motion
interface described in Section 3.2. Figure 4 shows the physical setup and identifies the robot arm,
gripper, and cameras.
Robot platform.
The current platform uses an I2RT YAM arm1 with six revolute joints and a
motorized linear_4310 parallel gripper. The nominal maximum inner jaw opening is 95.5 mm. The
arm operates over a tabletop workspace through the i2rt Python library and a CAN connection at
1 Mbit/s. The library supplies robot models, motor communication, and gravity compensation. The
free_agent runtime exposes camera captures, robot state, Cartesian and joint motion, and gripper
control. The default channel controls the left arm. Bimanual towel folding adds a right arm server
and expresses both arms’ Cartesian poses in the left base frame through a configured rigid transform.
The agent chooses how to coordinate commands across the two servers.
Observations and geometric grounding.
A wrist mounted Intel RealSense D4052 provides aligned
RGB and depth at 640×360 pixels, with a configured stream rate of 30 Hz. A fixed overhead Logitech
BRIO3 provides rectified RGB images at 1920 × 1080 pixels, also with a configured stream rate
of 30 Hz. The runtime exposes both views to the agent at these resolutions through on demand
observation requests. Captures include calibration, timestamps, and robot state. Wrist depth supports
deprojection into the arm base frame. Overhead pixels are grounded by intersecting camera rays with
a plane at an estimated height. The agent can acquire additional views and estimate scene geometry
during execution. Camera stream rates and observation requests are distinct from the agent’s decision
rate.
Figure 4: Robot platform and camera placement. The setup contains two I2RT YAM arms mounted
on a shared tabletop rail. The annotations identify an arm, a linear_4310 parallel gripper, a wrist
mounted Intel RealSense D405 RGB and depth camera, and the fixed overhead Logitech BRIO RGB
camera. The two arms support bimanual towel folding.
1https://doc.i2rt.com/products/yam
2https://www.realsenseai.com/products/stereo-depth-camera-d405/
3https://www.logitech.com/brio
13


Agent as Policy
Action interface.
The robot interface exposes state, status, help, frames, move_ee,
move_joints, and gripper. The agent computes geometry from saved images, depth, and
calibration in local programs. Cartesian motion invokes the underlying inverse kinematics and
trajectory execution software. Ordinary motion uses joint velocity and acceleration limits of 20◦/s
and 40◦/s2, a Cartesian translation limit of 0.03 m/s, and an orientation limit of 10◦/s. The gripper
target changes at 0.25 of its normalized travel per second. The session server enforces a radial target
envelope of 0.12 to 0.65 m, a grasp point height envelope of −0.050 to 0.60 m, and a maximum
Cartesian step of 0.25 m. For targeted throwing, the recorded case uses a task specific runtime with
timed motion programs to coordinate the swing and gripper release. Each program specifies joint
offsets at time knots and scheduled gripper targets. The executor interpolates commands on a 50 Hz
grid and records measured joint position, velocity, effort, and dispatch timing. Within these programs,
joint 4 uses velocity and acceleration limits of 180◦/s and 360◦/s2.
A.2
AGENT CONFIGURATION AND EXECUTION CONDITIONS
This subsection specifies the agent configuration introduced in Section 4.1.1 and the execution
conditions for the tool strategies described in Section 3.3.
Trial setup and execution conditions.
Each trial provides the robot interface, its documentation,
and a corresponding task prompt. Standard trials begin with fresh task experience. Task experience
reuse is a separately recorded setting. The efficiency comparison varies guidance on waiting for
action completion and combining consecutive operations. The same guidance is used across trials
within each condition. Trials record the interface, execution condition, and inherited experience.
Agent traces establish the effective waiting intervals, intermediate status checks, and commands
grouped within each invocation.
Agent configuration.
Each trial starts in a fresh session with interface documentation, task instruc-
tions, reference media, and a writable workspace. The agent can create Python programs and retain
observations and intermediate computations within that trial. Model weights remain fixed. Exact
model identifiers, agent software versions, host specifications, task budgets, and inference settings
are recorded with the evaluation. Prior trial solutions and attempt logs are excluded from fresh trial
inputs.
A.3
MODEL AND REASONING EFFORT CONFIGURATIONS
The model and thinking effort study in Section 4.2.2 and Table 2 uses four parts forming two pairs.
A hexagonal ring fits over a short post, and a circular sleeve fits over a stepped cylinder. Success
requires both pairs to remain assembled after release and arm withdrawal. The Codex configurations
comprise GPT-6 Astra at low, medium, and high thinking effort, plus GPT-5.6 Sol, GPT-5.6 Luna,
and GPT-5.6 Terra at high effort. The Claude Code configuration uses Claude Opus 5 at high effort
with model identifier claude-opus-5. Model selection and reasoning effort are configured through the
native controls of Claude Code (Anthropic, b). Each trial records the requested and resolved model
identifiers and effective effort setting.
The Astra effort sweep holds the model version, agent environment, task inputs, and robot interface
fixed. Each remaining model uses its specified high setting. Native effort settings are reported
alongside token usage, elapsed time, observation requests, action requests, and recovery episodes.
Comparisons across agent environments are interpreted as comparisons of complete systems. Every
configuration uses the same predefined assembly scenes, reference package, and time and request
budgets. GPT-6 Astra high assembly trials are shared between the model study and the main AGP
results, with each trial counted once per reported estimate.
B
TASKS AND EVALUATION PROTOCOL
B.1
TASK DEFINITIONS AND SUCCESS CRITERIA
Table 3 defines the tasks, target capabilities, instruction types, and success criteria used in the main
evaluation. Controller arrival tolerances are reported separately from task success tolerances.
14


Agent as Policy
Table 3: Task definitions and success criteria. Capability identifies the primary manipulation
challenge, and Instruction type identifies how the task goal or procedure is communicated. The final
column specifies the required behavior and physical outcome. Success is assessed from the final state
and execution video using criteria fixed before evaluation. Required assembly, support, orientation,
and fold relationships must remain stable after gripper release and arm withdrawal.
Task
Capability
Instruction type
Task requirements and success criteria
Four pair assem-
bly
Long horizon rea-
soning
Video
Assemble eight parts into four pairs in the demon-
strated order, inferring mating relationships and
insertion motions from the video and current scene.
Success requires all four pairs to remain assembled,
preserving completed pairs throughout subsequent
operations.
Block construc-
tion
Long horizon rea-
soning
Image
Arrange six cubes into a pyramid, two towers, or a
six block tower matching the goal image. Infer ob-
ject identities, orientations, and support relations,
and choose a placement order that maintains inter-
mediate stability. Success requires the complete
target structure.
Die flipping
Action diversity
Language
Reorient six randomly placed dice to the requested
upward face through grasp selection and rotation.
Success requires all six dice to show the requested
number after placement.
Targeted throw-
ing
Action diversity
Language
Coordinate a circular joint swing with gripper re-
lease to throw an object toward the specified target.
Success requires the object to separate from the
moving hand, travel through the air, and come to
rest within the target region.
Towel folding
Object diversity
Video
Use both arms to reproduce the demonstrated folds.
Fold the near long edge onto the far edge, then
fold both short ends inward, either right then left
(Sequential) or beginning together (Simultaneous).
Success requires both inward folds with reasonably
aligned edges. Small wrinkles and creases are per-
mitted, and the final table position is unrestricted.
Assembly from video.
The four pairs comprise a ridged sleeve and broad round base, a hexagonal
nut and short post, a smooth sleeve and stepped cylinder, and a long pin and hollow tube, in
demonstration order. The parts are 3D printed from AutoMate models (Tang et al., 2024). All
methods receive the same human video, extracted frames, and timestamped textual guide. We report
complete task success and the fraction of correctly assembled pairs. Figure 5 shows the demonstration
and robot execution.
Assembly part dimensions.
Table 4 reports the nominal printing dimensions and mating clearances
of the AutoMate meshes, scaled with their aspect ratios preserved.4 Successful assembly with nominal
radial clearances as small as 0.73 mm illustrates AGP’s ability to perform relatively fine manipulation
(Figure 5). Physical insertion tolerance also depends on printing accuracy and angular alignment.
Block construction from images.
Initial cube poses vary across trials while the goal photograph
remains fixed within each configuration. Block sets and placement tolerances are fixed before
evaluation. We report complete structure success and the fraction of correctly realized target relations,
with equal trial counts and separate resource accounting for each configuration. Figure 6 shows the
three construction cases.
4The plug and socket meshes are asset_plug.obj and asset_socket.obj in each official AutoMate
asset directory.
15


Agent as Policy
Table 4: Printing dimensions and mating clearances. Assembly identifies each AutoMate part
pair in demonstration order, with plug and socket meshes shown in blue and gray, respectively. Plug
overall size and Socket overall size give the respective mesh dimensions as x × y × z in the original
mesh frame. Hole Dh is the effective bore diameter, measured by the largest cylinder that fits through
the bore, including its narrowest ridges. Shaft Ds is the effective shaft diameter, measured by the
smallest cylinder enclosing the mating shaft segment. The diametral clearance is ∆= Dh −Ds, and
the conservative radial clearance c = ∆/2 gives the available transverse offset for parallel mating
axes. All dimensions and clearances are in millimeters. The hole is in the plug mesh for the first three
pairs and in the socket mesh for 00446. Clearances are computed before rounding.
Assembly
Plug overall size
Socket overall size
Hole Dh
Shaft Ds
∆
c
00081
52.95 × 52.98 × 27.53
71.59 × 71.65 × 58.26
37.41
35.86
1.56
0.78
00581
55.58 × 48.32 × 19.46
45.52 × 39.42 × 78.83
28.18
25.80
2.38
1.19
00007
51.08 × 50.94 × 39.60
42.42 × 42.30 × 81.44
42.86
37.20
5.66
2.83
00446
39.25 × 39.16 × 105.04
31.32 × 31.32 × 90.81
18.01
16.54
1.47
0.73
Action diversity.
Die flipping uses distinct initial and target faces balanced across predefined
conditions. We record final face correctness and annotate grasp selection, rotation, and regrasping
from video. The case in Appendix F.3 uses three black and three light blue dice, with a goal
photograph specifying six pips upward. For throwing, the object, target geometry, initial arrangement,
and permitted swing conditions are fixed before evaluation. We report success and landing error
relative to the target center, with execution records and video establishing joint motion, gripper
opening, and object separation. The case in Appendix F.4 uses joint 4.
Bimanual towel folding.
Each configuration provides an overhead human demonstration video and
images of the initial and final towel states. Trials begin with the towel lying flat in an arrangement
approximately matching the demonstration. Sequential and Simultaneous describe the demonstrated
folding patterns. The agent selects grasp points, arm assignments, and motion timing from the
observed towel state, and may stage placements to maintain arm clearance. Success is verified in
an overhead image after both grippers open and both arms withdraw. We evaluate five trials per
configuration and report success rate and resource use separately in Table 1. Figures 9 and 10 show
the respective demonstrations and robot executions.
B.2
TRIAL PROTOCOL
This subsection details the trial protocol outlined in Section 4.1.2. Prompting, dependencies, revision
rules, and persistent state access are documented for each AGP configuration. Each trial begins from
a documented physical reset and an initial scene drawn from a predefined set of placements. Model
and experience comparisons use matched task instances with counterbalanced execution order. Each
task has a fixed wall clock budget and a fixed budget for observation and action requests, shared
across configurations. Geometric queries and local computation are logged separately. Recovery
within a trial is allowed within these budgets. A reset or human intervention during execution ends
the autonomous trial. Physical failure, budget exhaustion, intervention, and infrastructure interruption
are recorded separately under a predefined inclusion policy.
16


Agent as Policy
B.3
METRIC DEFINITIONS AND RESOURCE ACCOUNTING
This subsection expands the metric definitions in Section 4.1.2 and specifies the accounting used for
the task and model comparisons in Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2.
Success and time.
For each task or model configuration, success rate is 100s/n, where s is the
number of completely successful trials and n is the number of evaluated trials. We provide the
underlying counts and 95% Wilson confidence intervals alongside the detailed results. The main
assembly task requires all four pairs to be complete in one trial. The model and thinking effort
comparison requires both pairs to be complete in one trial. Block construction reports success rate,
completion time, token usage, and model inference cost separately for its three configurations using
equal trial counts. The mean fraction of completed assembly pairs and realized block relations is
reported as partial completion diagnostics.
Completion time starts when the task and references are delivered and ends at final physical verifica-
tion. It includes policy construction or revision, reference processing, model calls, local computation,
sensing, motion, and recovery. Tables report the mean in minutes over successful trials, with the
observed minimum and maximum below in brackets. Detailed results include elapsed times for
all trials and the fraction that exhaust the budget. A configuration with no successful trials has an
undefined successful completion time. Each task configuration has five evaluated trials, except potato
throwing, which has two. Successful timing samples comprise four assembly, five pyramid, five
two tower, four six block tower, five die flipping, two potato throwing, five sequential folding, and
three simultaneous folding trials. Completion time, token usage, and cost in Table 1 use the same
successful trials for each configuration.
Interaction accounting.
The index k in Equation 1 counts agent tool decisions. The interaction
budget counts individual observation and action requests, including those grouped within a single
tool call.
Token usage.
Each trial retains usage records for every model request, including policy generation,
revision, observation interpretation, verification, and retries. Total tokens sum input and output usage
across those requests. Repeatedly submitted context is counted on each request. Cached input tokens
contribute once within the input total for that request. Provider usage records are normalized so that
output includes generated content and reasoning. Reasoning reported separately is added to this total,
and reasoning already included in output is counted once. Input, cached input, output, and reasoning
breakdowns are retained wherever exposed. Missing usage fields are marked unavailable, and their
coverage is reported. Table entries are mean total tokens per successful trial in thousands.
C
SUPPLEMENTARY CODING AGENT COMPARISON ON PYRAMID
CONSTRUCTION
We supplement the coding agent comparison on two pair assembly in Table 2 with a pyramid
construction experiment using GPT-5.6 Sol and GPT-6 Astra within Codex. Both models use high
thinking effort and control the YAM arm through the free_agent runtime. The goal is a six cube
pyramid with three blue cubes in the base, two grey cubes bridging the base seams, and one grey
cube at the peak.
Experimental configurations and outcomes.
Each model is evaluated over ten sessions. GPT-5.6
Sol completes the pyramid in seven sessions after gripper release and arm withdrawal. Two sessions
end by supervisor intervention with the structure incomplete. One session ends with the robot bridge
disconnected before physical execution. These three sessions count as unsuccessful. GPT-6 Astra
completes the pyramid in all ten sessions. Table 5 reports the successful sessions and resource use for
each model.
Usage and pricing.
We reconstruct per request usage from the original Codex traces, remove
duplicate usage events, and verify the sums against the final cumulative counters. Total tokens include
input and output, with reasoning counted once within output. We compute API equivalent inference
costs from recorded billable usage and each model’s Standard prices retrieved on September 9, 2026.
17


Agent as Policy
Table 5: Supplementary coding agent comparison on pyramid construction. Both Codex models
use high thinking effort, extending the comparison in Table 2. Successes count completed pyramids
recorded in the session reports. Interrupted sessions count as unsuccessful. Tokens and cost are
means over successful sessions for each model. Total cost covers all ten sessions for each model.
Cost uses Standard API prices for each model.
Model
Successes
Tokens (k)
Cost (USD)
Total (USD)
GPT-5.6 Sol
7/10
18860.3
9.22
87.25
GPT-6 Astra
10/10
9239.9
11.69
116.88
Astra sessions were configured for Fast service, and Table 5 normalizes their costs to Standard prices.
The executions used Pro subscriptions.
Interpretation.
Sol has lower estimated expenditure despite greater token usage. Its Standard token
prices are 40% of Astra’s corresponding prices. Pricing the same Sol usage at Astra Standard rates
would give USD 23.05 per successful session, compared with USD 11.69 for the Astra configuration.
This calculation separates the price contribution from the observed usage difference.
D
EFFICIENCY AND EXPERIENCE REUSE ANALYSIS
D.1
TASK EXECUTION TIME ANALYSIS
We reconstruct detailed timelines for the 37 trials in Table 1 by matching robot session identifiers
to the original timestamped agent traces. These traces contain 4,882 paired tool calls. Table 6
reports the mean time allocation over all five trials of each configuration and both potato throwing
trials, including unsuccessful trials. The task configurations and trial selection match Table 1, whose
resource means use successful trials. Each timeline starts at task delivery and ends at agent turn
completion or the recorded timeout. The assembly trial that reaches the timeout includes its terminal
failure report. For bimanual towel folding, we combine the left and right arm request logs and count
concurrent intervals once.
Decision, execution, and reporting time.
The visual loop combines image acquisition, geometric
queries, visual tool execution, and the model response immediately following image input. Such a
response can combine perception, planning, and code generation. Remaining response time covers
the same agent’s model and client time after accounting for the visual loop, tool execution, action
service, terminal checking, and reporting. It includes the model’s reasoning and response generation,
together with queueing and transport. The traces measure these contributions jointly. Model responses
immediately following image input, including their planning and code generation, contribute to the
visual loop. The split between these two columns therefore depends on the sequence of image inputs
and tool calls. The Local tools column covers the remaining tool execution intervals, including
shell commands through exec_command to read interface documentation, list workspace files, and
run local Python calculations, as well as process polling through write_stdin. Robot service
intervals and tool calls classified as visual processing are assigned to their respective categories before
local tool time is accumulated. Action service includes controller planning, movement, settling,
and unsuccessful requests. Terminal checking runs from the last action to the reporting boundary.
Reporting starts at the creation timestamp of the subsequent tool item that writes the result and ends
with the recorded execution. When a tool call combines final image acquisition and result writing,
the reporting boundary follows delivery of the final verification image. Intermediate checks remain
within their respective decision and execution intervals. We assign overlapping intervals once. The
total includes initial reading and terminal reporting, extending beyond the task completion metric in
Section 4.1.2.
Observed costs.
Four pair assembly averages 62.0 minutes across five trials, including 30.6 minutes
in the visual loop, 16.1 minutes of remaining response time, and 13.6 minutes of action service.
Among the block configurations, the six block tower has the longest visual loop at 18.4 minutes. Die
flipping averages 43.6 minutes, including 19.5 minutes in the visual loop and 14.3 minutes of action
18


Agent as Policy
Table 6: Detailed time allocation across manipulation tasks. Values are mean minutes over all
N evaluated trials in each configuration, including unsuccessful trials. Rows use the same trials as
Table 1. Total includes terminal reporting. The visual loop includes image conditioned decisions.
Remaining response time includes reasoning and generation by the same agent, together with client
and service time outside the other categories. The Local tools column covers shell execution, file
access, local calculations, and process polling. Action service includes controller planning, motion,
and settling. Concurrent arm requests contribute once to elapsed time. Throwing includes subsequent
trajectory analysis and verification. Rounded components may differ from the displayed total.
Task
N
Total
Visual
Remaining
response time
Local
Action
Check
Report
loop
tools
service
Four pair assembly
5
62.0
30.6
16.1
0.4
13.6
0.5
0.8
Block construction
Pyramid
5
23.7
9.4
3.7
0.2
8.5
1.0
0.9
Two towers
5
22.3
9.1
4.6
0.1
7.4
0.2
0.9
Six block tower
5
35.8
18.4
5.5
0.1
10.2
0.7
0.9
Die flipping
5
43.6
19.5
7.6
0.2
14.3
1.2
0.8
Targeted throwing
Potato
2
23.7
7.2
12.7
0.7
1.9
0.2
0.9
Towel folding
Sequential
5
52.7
25.4
10.0
0.5
14.7
0.3
1.9
Simultaneous
5
23.2
12.2
1.6
0.1
7.1
0.3
2.0
service. Sequential and simultaneous towel folding average 52.7 and 23.2 minutes, respectively,
with visual loops of 25.4 and 12.2 minutes. Potato throwing averages 23.7 minutes, including 12.7
minutes of remaining response time and 1.9 minutes of action service. Image conditioned decision
cycles account for a substantial share of elapsed time, with perception, planning, and code generation
coupled within model responses. Action service measures request handling, including controller
computation and settling, so its duration includes periods when the robot is stationary.
D.2
REPEATED EXECUTION WITH PERSISTENT EXPERIENCE
This subsection provides the protocol, timing boundaries, and execution records for the five cycle
experience accumulation study in Section 4.3.1.
Protocol and evidence.
A single right arm completes five consecutive cycles on the same ridged
ring and broad circular base. Every cycle begins assembled, places the removed ring independently
on the table, and ends with a stable assembly after release and withdrawal. In the first cycle, the agent
verifies the initial home posture and establishes the procedure from empty task experience. Each later
cycle uses a new Codex process and context, reads the previous experience checkpoint, and updates
object poses from current observations. Checkpoints retain cumulative geometry, successful scripts
and dependencies, failed attempts, corrections, and the next cycle plan. A handoff requires successful
stage records, a saved checkpoint, and normal agent exit. The agent performs final home after the
fifth cycle. The five cycles share a budget of 1,200 counted requests and 180 minutes. Joint velocity
and acceleration limits remain 20◦/s and 40◦/s2. Continuous wrist and overhead video, measured
joints, commanded actions, and stage markers span all five cycles. The final export confirms all ten
successful stages and all five checkpoints with complete recording streams.
Timing boundaries.
Task time runs from the disassembly start marker to the successful assembly
end marker and includes observation, computation, command execution, and retries within that
interval. Experience writing runs from assembly completion to checkpoint commit. For cycles 2
through 5, the handoff interval runs from the previous checkpoint to the current disassembly start.
It therefore includes the previous agent’s remaining report work, process exit, new agent startup,
and initial reading. The cycle accounting total is the sum of these three intervals. These contiguous
intervals sum to 53.8 minutes, while the full session takes 58.0 minutes including initial preparation,
final home, and final reporting and recording export. The first cycle begins assembled. Motion
19


Agent as Policy
Table 7: Execution time over five repeated task cycles. Times are seconds. Handoff includes work
after the preceding checkpoint. Retries count failed physical stage attempts. Calls lists motion and
gripper requests followed by frame capture requests over the cycle accounting interval. Successful
commands alone do not establish physical stage success.
Cycle
Task
Handoff
Experience
Total
Motion wait
Retries
Calls
1
870.3
0.0
119.4
989.7
127.2
1
37 / 37
2
408.8
170.2
114.1
693.1
91.6
0
32 / 34
3
372.3
33.3
117.6
523.1
92.5
0
32 / 33
4
372.2
45.9
112.2
530.3
92.7
0
32 / 34
5
393.2
29.0
68.5
490.7
91.7
0
32 / 33
Table 8: Time allocation for repeated two pair assembly. Times are seconds. Total is the sum of
Task, Experience, and Other. Motion wait is included in Task. Calls lists motion and gripper requests
followed by frame capture requests.
Trial
Task
Experience
Other
Total
Motion wait
Calls
1
471.0
81.2
6.8
559.0
134.3
26 / 27
2
387.0
66.0
16.0
469.0
144.1
24 / 25
3
408.0
53.3
7.7
469.0
137.9
23 / 24
4
425.0
59.3
13.7
498.0
131.3
23 / 24
5
475.0
48.7
5.3
529.0
128.9
23 / 24
command wait is the server interval for motion and gripper calls, including controller and transport
overhead. It contributes to the cycle accounting total.
Observed reuse and remaining costs.
The first cycle spends 445.7 seconds on disassembly and
424.0 seconds on assembly including recovery. Its initial insertion stalls, prompting a safe lift and
measurement of an approximately 9 mm offset between the grasped ring center and the tool. In later
cycles, the agent reuses the corrected alignment procedure and validates it with current observations.
Across cycles 2 through 5, disassembly takes 189.7, 166.9, 162.4, and 182.2 seconds, while assembly
takes 218.8, 205.2, 209.5, and 210.8 seconds. Motion command wait remains near 92 seconds in these
four cycles. Across the full sequence, task intervals account for 40.3 minutes, experience writing for
8.9 minutes, and handoffs for 4.6 minutes. Motion command wait totals 8.3 minutes within these
intervals. This leaves substantial scope to reduce observation and decision overhead and the cost of
writing and transferring experience. The recorded sequence provides five dependent repetitions, with
fixed model weights and updated physical poses. A matched comparison with fresh agents receiving
empty experience at every cycle is needed to isolate the contribution of persistent experience.
Two pair assembly with experience checkpoints.
Five trials use GPT-6 Astra at high thinking
effort on the left arm. Each trial assembles the hexagonal ring and narrow post and the circular
collar and stepped cylinder. A fresh agent receives cumulative experience and script snapshots from
previous trials. All five final agent reports describe stable assemblies after release and withdrawal.
These outcomes are agent assessments based on recorded visual evidence. Checkpoints preserve the
action helper, measurements, execution records, and result report.
Table 8 reconstructs timing from server logs, checkpoint timestamps, and trial duration records. Task
time extends from server startup to the last scene or robot state check and includes initial reading and
the return home. Experience writing extends from that check to checkpoint saving. Other overhead is
the remainder of the recorded trial duration. Server timestamps have one second resolution. Motion
wait sums logged service durations for motion and gripper requests, including rejected requests, and
is included in task time. This protocol uses separate trial sessions. Intervals between sessions are
excluded from trial totals, including the 20.6 minute interval before trial 3. These boundaries differ
from the stage markers and contiguous handoff accounting used for ring cycles.
20


Agent as Policy
Table 9: Programs constructed during execution. Primary purposes of the 37 retained Python
working files. Image crops, demonstration montages, and some object detection routines also appear
as inline code and are outside this file inventory.
Primary purpose
Files
Observed computations and operations
Perception and geometry
29
Depth measurement, color region selection, ray intersection, triangu-
lation, surface fitting, and grasp offset estimation.
Robot call composition
7
Pose and gripper commands followed by capture, concurrent calls to
different arms, compact responses, and full response logging.
Visual annotation
1
Projection of spatial reference points into camera images for inspec-
tion.
E
RUNTIME PROGRAM ANALYSIS
We analyze the programs constructed during 65 robot task executions to characterize the runtime
programming described in Section 3.3.
Program inventory.
The session workspaces retain 37 Python working files across 18 sessions.
Agent event logs identify their creation or renaming during execution. Table 9 groups these files by
their primary purpose. We count each retained working path once within its session. The inventory
separately identifies 63 Python file copies supplied through inherited knowledge and seven copies
exported for subsequent reuse. These copies are excluded from the 37 working files.
The logs also contain 135 shell command events with inline Python across 48 sessions, including
all 18 sessions with saved working files. These events contain image processing and geometric
computation as well as dependency checks, report writing, and file verification. An event can
combine several operations or create a saved program, so event and file counts are reported separately.
Interface capabilities affect the required code, since some archived configurations expose geometric
queries and others require local computation from calibration and depth. The counts describe retained
artifacts and recorded execution events under these conditions.
Surface fitting and grasp offset compensation.
In a four pair assembly execution, the agent
created fit_head.py to estimate the pose of a held pin from a wrist depth image. It sampled
triples of points to identify a planar surface, then used singular value decomposition to estimate
its normal. The following excerpt shows the refinement after selection of the surface points, with
statements placed on separate lines for readability.
ctr = best.mean(0)
_, _, v = np.linalg.svd(best - ctr)
normal = v[-1]
normal *= np.sign(normal[2])
The agent extended the program to intersect an overhead pixel ray with this plane, estimate the
pin tip using an assumed pin length, and express the tip offset in the gripper frame. A further
extension computed a corrected target orientation and position. The resulting horizontal target was
approximately (0.51325, −0.15820) m. The next motion request used (0.5133, −0.1582) m and the
computed quaternion, establishing a direct link between the program output and physical action
selection. That request returned a target arrival error. The agent then adjusted the requested position
and continued the insertion sequence. This trace illustrates successive program extensions and the
use of their outputs within a feedback loop.
Triangulation from two camera views.
In another four pair assembly execution, the agent created
triangulate.py. It converted selected wrist and overhead pixels into calibrated rays in the robot
base frame. Given ray origins t1 and t2 and unit directions d1 and d2, the program computed the
closest points on the two rays using the following operations.
ab = np.linalg.lstsq(
np.stack([d1, -d2], 1), t2 - t1, rcond=None
21


Agent as Policy
)[0]
p1 = t1 + ab[0] * d1
p2 = t2 + ab[1] * d2
It returned their midpoint as the position estimate and their separation as a consistency measure.
The agent subsequently called the same program on additional targets. Pixel correspondences were
supplied by the agent, and the ray separation measures agreement between those inputs under the
saved calibration. Position accuracy also depends on correspondence and calibration error.
Visual processing and execution helpers.
Other executions contain inline programs for color
segmentation, circle detection with multiple thresholds, and demonstration frame montages. During
bimanual towel folding, the agent created step.py to read both arm states, dispatch one operation
per arm concurrently, and capture observations after the operations. It also retained full responses in
a local log while printing compact results. Concurrent arm control was documented by the interface,
and this session received inherited tools and execution guidance. The example illustrates how the
agent composed available operations into a program suited to its execution loop. Together, these
cases document task dependent computation and tool composition. Their effects on task performance
require comparisons that control interface capabilities and inherited experience.
F
QUALITATIVE TASK EXAMPLES
F.1
FOUR PAIR ASSEMBLY
Figure 5 shows the input demonstration and a recorded execution of the four pair assembly task in
Section 4.1.2. Eight separate parts must form four assemblies in the demonstrated order. A ridged
sleeve fits over a broad round base, a hexagonal nut fits over a short post, a smooth sleeve fits over a
stepped cylinder, and a long pin enters a hollow tube. The upper panel shows the human completing
these four relationships. The lower panel shows the robot grasping, aligning, and inserting the
corresponding parts in its own workspace.
This case illustrates following video instructions through the translation of demonstrated part rela-
tionships into robot actions. It also illustrates long horizon reasoning through the completion of all
four pairs while preserving earlier assemblies. During the second assembly, unsuccessful insertion
displaces the nut onto the table. The dark red segment marks this failure, and the yellow segment
shows the subsequent grasp retries. The agent adjusts its grasp position and gripper orientation, seats
the nut, and continues with the remaining two assemblies. The final frame shows all four assembled
pairs after release and arm withdrawal.
The upper panel contains 20 human demonstration frames, with one row per assembly. The lower
panel contains 40 robot execution frames. Read each panel from left to right and then from top to
bottom. Unequal sampling intervals highlight changes in the physical task state. Timestamps measure
elapsed time in each source video, including observation, reasoning, computation, and waiting during
the robot execution.
22


Agent as Policy
Figure 5: Four pair assembly from a human demonstration video. The upper panel shows four
demonstrated assemblies. The lower panel shows the robot assembling eight parts into four pairs,
illustrating video instruction following and long horizon reasoning. Dark red bars mark failed nut
insertion and displacement. Yellow bars mark grasp retries. Read each panel row by row. Timestamps
give elapsed minutes and seconds in each video at unequal intervals.
23


Agent as Policy
F.2
BLOCK CONSTRUCTION
Figure 6 shows the three configurations in Section 4.1.2, ordered as in Table 1. Each starts with
six separate cubes and a static goal image specifying colors and support relations. The agent uses
workspace observations to choose successive placements, illustrating image instruction following and
long horizon reasoning.
In the pyramid, three blue cubes form the base, two grey cubes bridge the base seams, and one grey
cube forms the peak. The robot completes each tier before building the next. For the two towers, the
color orders from bottom to top are blue, grey, blue and grey, blue, grey. The robot places both bases,
both middle cubes, and then both top cubes, preserving the distinct color orders. The six block tower
alternates grey and blue above a retained grey base. The robot adds five cubes while maintaining
alignment and stability. All three final structures remain standing after release and arm withdrawal.
Figure 6: Block construction from static goal images. From top to bottom are the pyramid, two
towers, and six block tower. Each occupies two rows of five images, beginning with the goal image
labeled Demo and followed by nine execution frames read row by row. Timestamps give elapsed
minutes and seconds in each recording at unequal intervals.
24


Agent as Policy
F.3
DIE FLIPPING
Figure 7 shows a recorded execution of the die flipping task in Section 4.1.2. The scene contains
three black and three light blue dice with different initial upward faces. The supplied goal photograph
specifies six pips upward on every die. Positions and rotations within the table plane are unrestricted,
so completion depends on the upward faces of all six dice.
The agent inspects the dice, selects grasps according to the visible faces, and rotates each grasped
die before releasing it near the table. The execution record describes adjustments to the grasp axis
and a reachable 60◦tilt followed by a low release that allows the die to settle onto the intended face.
Further observations guide regrasping and verify the resulting orientation. This case illustrates action
diversity through grasp dependent reorientation and adaptation to the arm’s reachable poses. The
final frame shows all six dice with six pips upward after the arm withdraws.
The figure uses two rows of five images. The first cell, labeled Demo, contains the supplied goal
photograph. The remaining nine cells show the initial scene, intermediate manipulations, and final
state in chronological order. Timestamps give elapsed minutes and seconds in the overhead recording,
including observation and waiting between actions.
Figure 7: Die flipping across six dice. The goal photograph in the cell labeled Demo specifies six
pips upward on each of three black and three light blue dice. Nine overhead execution frames show
the initial faces, successive manipulations, and final state with all six target faces upward. The task
requires selecting grasps and rotations that produce the requested orientation after release. Read the
execution frames row by row. Timestamps show elapsed minutes and seconds in the source video.
25


Agent as Policy
F.4
TARGETED THROWING
Figure 8 shows a recorded case of targeted throwing from the action diversity group in Section 4.1.2.
The language instruction asks the agent to grasp a potato shaped object and throw it into a stationary
bowl. The required motion is a circular swing driven by joint 4, with the other five joint targets held
fixed and the gripper opening during the swing. The sequence makes the task geometry visible, from
the object and bowl on the table to the grasp, launch posture, swing, release, and final bowl outcome.
The agent selects the grasp, motion profile, and opening schedule from observations and execution
feedback. It first performs two motion probes while retaining the object, then adjusts the swing
extent and coordinates the swing and gripper opening in a buffered program. This case illustrates
the dynamic release component of action diversity, where the physical outcome depends on the
relationship between arm motion and release timing. The sampled views show the object separating
from the gripper and subsequently resting inside the bowl. Occlusion leaves the complete rising
segment and apex unresolved, so assessment of the full throwing criterion also requires the execution
records and video described in Appendix B.1.
The upper grid contains 20 overhead frames showing the arm, object, and bowl. The lower grid
contains 18 wrist frames providing a closer view of retention and separation at the fingers. Read each
grid from left to right and then from top to bottom. Timestamps use a common recording clock, with
denser sampling around release and landing to make the rapid motion visible.
26


Agent as Policy
Figure 8: Targeted throwing from a language instruction. The task requires a joint driven circular
swing and timed gripper release toward a bowl, illustrating the dynamic release component of action
diversity. The overhead sequence shows the initial arrangement, grasp, swing, and final object
position inside the bowl. The wrist sequence shows retention and separation at the gripper. Occlusion
limits the visible flight trajectory. Read each grid row by row. Timestamps show elapsed minutes,
seconds, and milliseconds on a common clock, with denser sampling around release and landing.
27


Agent as Policy
F.5
BIMANUAL TOWEL FOLDING
Figures 9 and 10 illustrate the Sequential and Simultaneous configurations of the towel folding task
in Section 4.1.2.
Sequential folding.
Figure 9 shows the human demonstration and a recorded bimanual execution
of Sequential folding. The demonstration first brings the near long edge onto the far long edge to
form a doubled strip. It then folds the right short end inward toward the center, followed by the left
short end. The resulting towel has two adjacent flaps meeting near a central seam. The task specifies
these fold relationships and their order while leaving grasp selection, arm coordination, and final
position on the table to the agent.
Both arms initially grasp the near corners. When the right corner slips during transport, the agent
observes the changed towel shape and recovers that corner before completing the paired carry. A
further grasp corrects a turned back edge. The arms then move the doubled strip closer to their bases.
The left arm holds one end while the right folds its end inward, after which the left performs the
remaining fold. Subsequent grasps and pulls flatten the raised left corner and attempt to improve
the right flap. This case illustrates object diversity through manipulation of deformable material and
following video instructions through translation of the demonstrated folds into coordinated robot
actions. The session also provides notes from earlier towel trials for the agent to consult.
The final frame shows both arms withdrawn and the towel released with all three folds in place. The
left flap is substantially flatter after correction, while the right flap retains a visible buckle and the
far edges remain offset. The execution report therefore judges the result a partial visual match. The
sequence documents the completed fold order together with the remaining alignment errors.
The upper panel contains 15 demonstration frames in three rows of five. The lower panel contains 30
execution frames in six rows of five. Read each panel from left to right and then from top to bottom.
Unequal sampling intervals show the initial state, folding actions, recovery, and final configuration.
Timestamps measure elapsed minutes and seconds in each source video. The final sampled frames
occur at 20 seconds in the demonstration and 35 minutes 32 seconds in the execution recording. The
execution timestamps include observation, reasoning, computation, and waiting between actions.
28


Agent as Policy
Figure 9: Sequential bimanual towel folding from a human demonstration video. The upper
panel contains 15 frames showing the long edge fold followed by the right and left ends folding
inward. The lower panel contains 30 frames showing coordinated grasping, recovery after a corner
slips, the three folds, and subsequent adjustments. The final towel preserves the demonstrated fold
arrangement with a remaining buckle and edge offsets. Read each panel row by row. Timestamps
show elapsed minutes and seconds in the respective source videos, with unequal sampling intervals.
29


Agent as Policy
Simultaneous folding.
Figure 10 shows the second human demonstration and a successful robot
trial under the Simultaneous configuration. The demonstrator first folds the near long edge onto the
far long edge, then brings both short ends inward together to form two adjacent flaps. The robot
initially grasps the two near corners with separate arms. After the right corner slips during transport,
the left arm holds its corner while the right arm recovers the displaced edge. Both arms then complete
the long edge fold.
The agent moves the doubled towel closer to the arm bases, then carries both short ends inward
concurrently to separated staging positions. It places and releases the left flap before placing the right
flap to maintain arm clearance. A subsequent correction uses the left arm to anchor an outer edge
while the right arm draws a raised inner hem toward the center. The final overhead image shows the
towel released and both arms withdrawn, with both inward folds completed. The right flap retains
skew and a curled inner edge, with a gap near the far side of the central seam. This trial is counted as
successful in Table 1 under the physical outcome assessment described in Appendix B.2.
The upper panel contains 15 human demonstration frames and the lower panel contains 30 robot
execution frames. Timestamps are relative to the start of each source video. The last sampled
frames occur at 22 seconds and 18 minutes 47 seconds, respectively. The robot recording includes
observation, reasoning, recovery, final verification, and the interval after the arms withdraw.
30


Agent as Policy
Figure 10: Simultaneous bimanual towel folding from a human demonstration video. The upper
panel shows the long edge fold followed by both short ends folding inward together. The lower panel
shows the robot execution, including recovery of a slipped corner, the long edge fold, inward transport
of both ends, staged placement of the flaps, and alignment correction. The final state contains both
inward folds with residual skew and edge offsets, with both arms withdrawn. Read each panel row by
row. Timestamps show elapsed minutes and seconds in the respective source videos, with unequal
sampling intervals.
31


Agent as Policy
G
EXECUTION ACROSS ARM AND END EFFECTOR EMBODIMENTS
We examine AGP on a different arm and end effector through the task of picking up a bottle from
a tabletop. The setup in Figure 11 replaces the six joint I2RT YAM arm and parallel gripper with
a seven joint P7 arm and a RealHand L6 dexterous hand. The hand has five fingers and six control
channels, comprising thumb flexion, thumb abduction, and one channel for each remaining finger.
The experiment uses the left arm and hand, with observations from a fixed overhead RealSense D435i
and a wrist mounted RealSense D435. Both color streams are configured at 640 × 480 pixels and
15 Hz. The agent inspects these views and robot feedback to choose successive arm motions and
finger targets through the P7 and L6 control interfaces. This setup changes both arm kinematics and
the dimensionality of end effector control while retaining the observation and action loop.
P7 arm
Seven revolute joints
RealHand L6
Five fingers
Six control channels
Overhead camera
RealSense D435i
Wrist camera
RealSense D435
Figure 11: P7 and L6 platform for the cross embodiment experiment. The annotations identify
the P7 arm, RealHand L6 dexterous hand, overhead RealSense D435i, and wrist mounted RealSense
D435. The illustrated station contains two arms. The bottle task uses the left arm and hand with the
overhead and left wrist views.
Figure 12 shows the grasp and lift sequence. From a stationary tabletop preparation pose, the
agent reorients the wrist, opens the thumb, and approaches the bottle through successive position
adjustments. It then closes the fingers in stages and commands a 2 cm upward wrist motion to raise
the bottle. Approximately 4.6 minutes elapse from the first grasp action to the displayed lift, including
observation, reasoning, and waiting between motions. The bottle slips during subsequent holding.
The demonstrated grasp and lift provides qualitative evidence that AGP can coordinate a different
arm and dexterous hand through their available interfaces.
32


Agent as Policy
Figure 12: Bottle grasp and lift with the P7 arm and L6 hand. The upper panel contains 15
overhead frames read row by row, showing wrist reorientation, approach, finger closure, and lifting.
The lower panel shows five corresponding stages from the wrist camera. Timestamps measure elapsed
minutes and seconds from the first grasp action after stationary preparation. Frames are sampled at
unequal intervals, with the last frame at 04:36. The two views are approximately aligned using their
recorded host timestamps.
33


Agent as Policy
H
ERROR AND RECOVERY STUDY
We examine execution errors and recovery attempts to understand how local mistakes affect task
completion.
H.1
SIX BLOCK TOWER COLLAPSE DURING WITHDRAWAL
The task requires six cubes stacked in alternating grey and blue layers. After the fourth cube turned
out of alignment during placement, the agent regrasped and corrected it. To overcome limited reach at
the sixth level, it assembled the top two cubes on the table and transferred them together by grasping
the lower cube. All six cubes stood after release, but the tower collapsed during the subsequent
arm withdrawal. The observations establish when the collapse occurred, while the exact contact or
instability that caused it remains unresolved.
The agent then localized the scattered cubes to assess whether it could rebuild. Both overhead
geometry and wrist depth placed one grey cube near x = 0.70 m in the robot base frame, beyond the
interface’s 0.65 m radial grasp limit. It ended the attempt as unsuccessful despite having time and
command budget remaining.
This case shows why withdrawal is part of task execution. A completed placement must remain stable
as the arm moves clear. It also illustrates a limit of recovery through reobservation and regrasping.
The earlier alignment error was corrected while the stack remained intact, whereas the collapse
moved a required cube beyond grasp reach and prevented rebuilding.
34


Agent as Policy
I
BROADER IMPACT
AGP explores how general purpose agents can support physical manipulation through observation,
runtime programming, and adaptation to execution feedback. This approach may reduce the task
specific engineering required to develop robot behaviors and make it easier for researchers to prototype
manipulation tasks from video, image, and language instructions. Persistent programs and execution
records also provide a basis for studying how robots can retain and reuse practical experience.
A potential application is collecting robot trajectories for policy learning through repeated AGP
execution. Synchronized visual observations, actions, and measured robot states could provide
demonstrations for training vision language action policies, while failed attempts and recovery
segments could support research on robustness. This approach could reduce the human effort required
to produce demonstrations. Its practical value would depend on trajectory quality, collection costs,
and the performance of policies trained on these data.
Applying agents to physical systems introduces risks from inaccurate perception, faulty programs,
and inappropriate motion requests, which can cause equipment damage or injury. Our implementation
separates agent reasoning from motion execution and applies workspace and motion limits through the
robot runtime. Deployment in settings involving people or unfamiliar environments requires additional
safety evaluation, appropriate supervision, and independent protective mechanisms. Inference costs
and execution latency also affect the practicality and accessibility of this approach. Evaluating these
constraints alongside task performance is essential to understanding where AGP can provide practical
benefits.
35
