A Hierarchical Coverage Path Planning Algorithm for Unknown
Environments
Zongyuan Shen1, Haodong Liu1, Gao Wang1, Hongbin Ma2, Yaming Ou3,
Shancheng Zhao1, and Dehua Zhou1
Abstract— This paper presents an online coverage path plan-
ning algorithm for unknown environments. During navigation,
the initially unknown search area is progressively decomposed
into disconnected subareas as new obstacle information is ac-
quired and coverage proceeds. These subareas are organized in
an incrementally constructed decomposition tree that preserves
their hierarchical parent-child relationships. Based on this tree,
a global coverage tour is maintained and updated online by
prioritizing newly generated child subareas according to their
exploration states and distances from the robot. A local planner
then generates coverage motions within each selected subarea,
allowing the robot to adapt its trajectory as the environment
is gradually revealed. Its performance is evaluated via high-
fidelity simulations in complex scenarios. The results show
improved coverage efficiency in terms of path length and
overlap ratio in comparison to three baseline algorithms.
Index Terms— Motion and Path Planning, Coverage Path
Planning, Unknown Environments.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in sensing, computing, and autonomous
systems have enabled robots to perform an increasing variety
of service and field operations. Many of these tasks require
a robot to traverse a target workspace and provide complete
coverage of all accessible regions, giving rise to the coverage
path planning (CPP) problem. CPP is a fundamental problem
in robot motion planning and has been widely applied to
environmental monitoring [1]–[3], structural inspection [4],
[5], surface cleaning [6], spray painting [7], and agricultural
operations [8]. In addition to guaranteeing complete cover-
age, practical CPP methods are expected to achieve efficient
execution by reducing path length, repeated coverage, the
number of turns, and other task-dependent costs.
In many practical applications, however, the environment
is unknown or only partially known before deployment. In
such cases, a complete coverage path cannot be planned in
advance, and the robot must incrementally generate and up-
date its coverage trajectory using environmental information
collected by onboard sensors. This online setting couples
coverage with exploration, requiring the robot to discover
previously unknown regions while simultaneously avoiding
obstacles and covering the observed free space. The planning
problem becomes particularly challenging in complex envi-
ronments, where inappropriate coverage decisions may lead
1College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University,
Guangzhou 510632, China.
2School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081,
China.
3School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
to dead ends, isolated uncovered regions, repeated traversal,
and excessive overlap. Therefore, an effective online CPP
method must not only adapt to newly acquired environmental
information in real time, but also make coverage decisions
that maintain high efficiency throughout the entire operation.
Most existing online CPP methods determine the next
coverage motion primarily from locally available informa-
tion. Such local decision rules are computationally efficient
and easy to implement in real time, but they provide only
a limited view of the remaining coverage task. In com-
plex environments, locally favorable decisions may lead the
robot toward dead ends, leave isolated uncovered regions,
or require repeated traversal to revisit previously bypassed
areas. Some methods attempt to alleviate these problems by
checking whether a candidate motion would disconnect the
remaining uncovered space, but such decisions are still made
within a limited local neighborhood and may not capture the
broader structure of the coverage task.
In this regard, we propose a hierarchical coverage planning
method for unknown environments that combines online
space decomposition, global tour planning, and local cov-
erage planning. During online operation, the search space
is progressively decomposed as newly observed obstacles
and covered regions separate the remaining uncovered space
into multiple subareas. Instead of treating these subareas as
independent coverage tasks, the proposed method organizes
them into an incrementally constructed decomposition tree
that preserves their parent-child relationships. Based on this
tree, the global planner continuously updates the visitation
sequence of the active subareas by prioritizing newly gener-
ated descendants of the current branch. The child subareas
are further ordered according to their exploration states and
distances from the robot, allowing the planner to coordinate
global coverage while retaining a lightweight online planning
structure. A local planner then generates the coverage motion
within the selected target subarea.
The main contributions of this work are twofold. First,
we develop an online space decomposition framework that
incrementally organizes dynamically generated uncovered
subareas into a hierarchical decomposition tree, preserv-
ing the parent-child relationships revealed during coverage.
Second, we propose a lightweight global tour planning
strategy that directly exploits this tree structure to update
the visitation sequence of active subareas using exploration-
state and distance-based priorities, while local coverage is
performed within the selected target subarea. The effective-
ness of the proposed method is evaluated through simulation
arXiv:2609.12595v1  [cs.RO]  11 Sep 2026


and real-world experiments. The remainder of this paper is
organized as follows. Section II reviews related work on
online coverage planning. Section III presents the proposed
algorithm, including online space decomposition, global tour
planning, and local coverage planning. Section IV reports the
simulation results, and Section V concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
A comprehensive review of coverage path planning meth-
ods can be found in [9]. In this section, we briefly discuss
representative online CPP methods.
Gabriely and Rimon [10] proposed the spanning tree
covering algorithm, which constructs a spanning tree over
a coarse grid and generates the coverage path by traversing
around the tree. Each coarse cell is divided into four fine
cells according to the robot footprint. Full spiral STC [11]
further incorporates partially occupied cells into an aug-
mented tree to improve coverage resolution. Gonzalez et
al. [12] developed the backtracking spiral algorithm, which
generates spiral-like coverage motions by following obstacles
and covered regions along a fixed lateral direction. When
no local uncovered cell is available, the robot backtracks
to resume coverage elsewhere. Ferranti et al. [13] proposed
the brick-and-mortar algorithm, which expands inaccessible
regions while preserving traversability among the remaining
accessible cells. Luo and Yang [14] developed a biologically
inspired neural-network-based coverage method in which
each grid cell is represented by a neuron. Uncovered cells
provide excitatory inputs while obstacles provide inhibitory
inputs. The robot follows the resulting neural activity land-
scape, whose propagation can also guide it toward distant
uncovered regions when no local target is available.
Viet et al. [15] proposed the BA∗algorithm, which selects
the next uncovered cell according to a predefined directional
priority and consequently produces back-and-forth motions.
When the local sweep can no longer continue, the robot
moves to a previously identified backtracking location and
resumes coverage from the remaining uncovered region.
Song and Gupta [16] proposed the ε∗algorithm, which
employs multiscale adaptive potential surfaces for coverage
decision-making. The robot normally selects targets using the
lowest-level potential surface in its local neighborhood, while
higher-level potential surfaces are used when the robot en-
counters dead-end situations. Hassan and Liu [17] proposed
the predator-prey coverage path planning algorithm, which
evaluates neighboring cells using a multi-objective reward
function. The reward considers the distance from a virtual
stationary predator, motion smoothness, and the tendency to
follow the uncovered-region boundary. The candidate with
the highest reward is selected as the next coverage target.
Shen et al. [18] proposed the connectivity-aware hierar-
chical coverage path planning algorithm, which dynamically
identifies disconnected uncovered subareas and represents
them using a global graph. Collision-free connections be-
tween subareas are used to compute a TSP-based traversal
tour. At the local level, the algorithm switches between
exploratory coverage in partially observed subareas and
optimized coverage paths in fully observed regions. Shen et
al. [19] proposed C∗, a sampling-based online CPP algorithm
that incrementally constructs a sparse rapidly covering graph
(RCG) from sensor observations. The RCG provides non-
local guidance for coverage waypoint selection and dead-
end escape. C∗also detects potential coverage holes during
navigation and generates locally optimized trajectories to
cover them before continuing the main coverage process.
Some CPP methods have also been developed for 3D
structure coverage [20], [21], multi-robot systems [22], [23],
curvature-constrained robots [8], [24], tethered robots [25],
[26], and energy-constrained robots [27], [28].
III. PROPOSED ALGORITHM
Let A ⊂R2 denote the initially unknown search area
and is discretized into a set of cells T = {τj}|T |
j=1. During
online operation, the robot updates the state of each cell
using onboard sensor measurements. Accordingly, the tiling
is partitioned into obstacle, free, and unknown cells, i.e.,
T = To∪Tf ∪Tu, where the free cells are further divided into
covered and uncovered subsets, Tf = T c
f ∪T u
f . The proposed
method consists of three components: online space decompo-
sition, global tour planning, and local coverage planning. The
key idea is to retain the hierarchical decomposition structure
that naturally emerges during online coverage and directly
exploit this structure for global task sequencing.
A. Online Space Decomposition
At the beginning of the coverage task, the entire search
area A is represented by the root node n0 of a decomposition
tree G = (N, E), where N denotes the set of subarea nodes
and E represents the parent-child relationships generated
during online decomposition. The root node is set as target
ntarget. The robot performs local coverage in the target
subarea Atarget. As coverage progresses, newly observed
obstacles and covered cells may partition the remaining
uncovered portion of this region into multiple disconnected
subareas. Theses subareas are identified through recursive
search over neighboring uncovered cells. Starting from an
unlabeled cell in target subarea, all connected neighboring
uncovered cells are recursively assigned the same subarea
index. The procedure is repeated until all uncovered cells
belonging to the current region have been assigned.
Suppose that Atarget is divided into L disconnected
components, i.e., Atarget →{A1, A2, . . . , AL}. The cor-
responding node ntarget is then expanded by inserting
{n1, n2, . . . , nL} as its child nodes in G, where each child
represents one newly identified subarea. The tree explicitly
records how the search area evolves from coarse regions into
progressively smaller coverage subareas. Each active subarea
is further assigned one of two states. A subarea is classified
as exploring if it contains at least one uncovered free cell
adjacent to the unknown region Tu. Otherwise, it is classified
as explored. Only leaf nodes of the tree are considered active
coverage tasks. As the robot explores the environment, the
decomposition tree is incrementally expanded until all active
leaves have been completely covered.


B. Global Coverage Tour Planning
A global coverage tour γglobal = {n(1), n(2), . . . , n(M)}
containing the active subareas that remain to be covered is
constantly maintained and updated online. Given the child
nodes {n1, n2, . . . , nL} of target node ntarget. The child
nodes are first ordered according to their coverage states.
Explored subareas receive higher priority than exploring
subareas. Within the same state category, the children are
ranked according to their transition distance from the robot.
Let pR denote the current robot position and pi the rep-
resentative position of subarea Ai. The transition cost is
defined as d(pR, pi), where d(·, ·) is the Euclidean distance.
The children are therefore sorted lexicographically such that
an explored child is always preferred over an exploring
child, while children having the same state are ordered by
increasing transition distance.
Let Γ = {nα1, nα2, . . . , nαL} denote the resulting ordered
child sequence. The global tour is updated by replacing
the current target node ntarget with Γ. For example, let
{n1, n2, n3} be the current global tour γglobal. Let n1 be the
current target node ntarget. Suppose n1 is decomposed into
n11 and n12, then the new tour is {n11, n12, n2, n3} and n11
is set as target. If n11 is later decomposed into n111 and n112,
the sequence becomes {n111, n112, n12, n2, n3}. Thus, newly
generated descendants of the current subarea are prioritized
before the planner switches to other branches. The resulting
behavior follows the hierarchical structure revealed during
online coverage while avoiding repeated global optimization
over all remaining subareas. If the current target is com-
pletely covered without further decomposition, it is simply
removed from the tour, i.e., γglobal ←γglobal \ ntarget, and
the first remaining node becomes the next target node.
C. Local Coverage Path Planning
The local planner generates the coverage motion inside the
corresponding subarea of target node ntarget.
For an exploring subarea, the robot follows a greedy
strategy that selects an uncovered cell τtarget from its local
neighborhood according to a predefined directional priority.
The selected cell is marked as covered once visited, produc-
ing a back-and-forth coverage pattern while simultaneously
discovering new environmental information. As the robot
continues covering an exploring subarea, the updated map
may reveal that the remaining uncovered region has been
divided into multiple disconnected components. In this case,
the current node is expanded in the decomposition tree and
the global tour is updated using the procedure described
in Sections III-A and III-B. For an explored subarea, its
geometry is already completely known. The local planner
therefore generates a shortest coverage path γlocal that starts
from the current robot position pR, visits all remaining
uncovered cells in the selected subarea, and terminates at
the designated target cell.
The global and local planning steps are repeatedly exe-
cuted until γglobal = ∅, which indicates that no uncovered
subarea remains and complete coverage has been achieved.
Algorithm 1: Proposed Algorithm
1 G ←n0; γglobal ←{n0}; ntarget ←n0;
2 while γglobal̸ = ∅do
3
{T , pR} ←UpdateSensorData();
4
if isExploring(ntarget) then
5
{Aℓ}L
ℓ=1 ←IdentifySubarea(ntarget);
6
if L > 1 then
7
G ←UpdateTree(G, ntarget, {Aℓ}L
ℓ=1);
8
Γ ←OrderChildren({Aℓ}L
ℓ=1, pR);
9
γglobal ←
UpdateGlobalTour(γglobal, ntarget, Γ);
10
ntarget ←γglobal.top();
11
end
12
end
13
if isComplete(ntarget) then
14
γglobal ←γglobal −ntarget;
15
if γglobal̸ = ∅then
16
ntarget ←γglobal.top();
17
end
18
end
19
LocalCover(ntarget);
20 end
D. Time Complexity Analysis
The computational complexity of the proposed method is
evaluated for the main operations of online space decompo-
sition, global tour planning, and local coverage planning.
During online space decomposition, the robot recursively
searches the uncovered free cells to identify disconnected
subareas. Since each relevant uncovered cell is labeled at
most once, this operation has a worst-case complexity of
O(|T u
f |), where T u
f denotes the set of currently uncovered
free cells. Suppose that the current target subarea is decom-
posed into L child subareas. Updating the decomposition tree
requires only inserting the newly generated child nodes and
their parent-child connections, resulting in a complexity of
O(L). For global tour planning, the newly generated children
are first classified according to their explored or exploring
states. Within each category, their priorities are determined
using the Euclidean distances between the robot and the
representative positions of the child subareas. Distance eval-
uation requires O(L) operations, while sorting the children
requires O(L log L) time. Once the next target subarea is
selected, a shortest collision-free transition path from the
current robot position to the target is computed using the
A* algorithm. In the worst case, the search is performed
over the currently known free cells, resulting in a complexity
of O(|Tf|2), where Tf denotes the set of currently known
free cells. For local coverage planning, an exploring subarea
is covered using a greedy strategy with O(1) complexity
for each local decision. For an explored subarea, the local
planner has a worst-case complexity of O(|Atarget|2), where
|\target| denotes the number of cells of the target subarea.
Therefore, the overall worst-case complexity of one
planning update is O

|T u
f | + L log L + |Tf|2 + |Atarget|2
.
Since |Tf| ≥|T u
f | and |Tf| ≥|Atarget|, and the number
of child subareas L generated by a single decomposition
event is generally much smaller than |Tf|, the overall time
complexity is dominated by the shortest-path search and can
be expressed as O(|Tf|2).


Ours
0*
BINN
PPCPP
(a) Coverage paths generated by different algorithms in scene 1.
Ours
0*
BINN
PPCPP
(b) Coverage paths generated by different algorithms in scene 2.
Path length (km)
Scene 1
Scene 2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Overlap ratio (%)
Scene 1
Scene 2
0
15
30
45
60
75
Ours
0*
BINN
PPCPP
(c) Comparison of performance metrics.
Fig. 1. Performance comparison of proposed algorithm with the baseline algorithms in simulations.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The performance of proposed algorithm is evaluated by
high-fidelity simulations on Gazebo. As shown in Fig. 1,
four complex scenes of dimensions 90m×90m are generated
with different obstacle layouts and partitioned into a 30×30
tiling structure for mapping and coverage. Each scene depicts
a real situation (e.g., office). A car-like robot is simulated
with a maximum speed of 1m/s and initialized at the
bottom-left corner of the space. It is equipped with a lidar
with a detection range of 8m. Three baseline algorithms
including ϵ∗[16], BINN [14], and PPCPP [17] are selected
for performance comparison in terms of path length and
overlap ratio. Figs. 1a-1b show the coverage paths gener-
ated by different algorithms in two scenes. As seen, the
proposed algorithm provides complete coverage with less
overlapping paths. This is because it captures the information
of disconnected subareas and and then computes a global
tour to guide the coverage process, which helps improve
overall coverage efficiency. Additionally, it performs TSP-
based optimal coverage path within the explored subareas to
further minimize overlapping paths and local coverage time.
In contrast, the baseline algorithms follow greedy strategies
to achieve complete coverage without a global perspective
of the entire search area, thus leading to highly overlapping
paths and sub-optimal motions. Fig. 1c provides quantitative
comparison results in terms of path length and overlap
ratio. Overall, the proposed algorithm achieves significant
improvements over the baseline algorithms in all metrics.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents a hierarchical coverage path planning
method for efficient online coverage of unknown environ-
ments. During navigation, the search space is progressively
decomposed into disconnected subareas, which are organized
in an incrementally constructed decomposition tree that
preserves their parent-child relationships. The tree structure
is directly exploited for global tour planning, where newly
generated child subareas are prioritized according to their
exploration states and distances from the robot. Combined
with adaptive local coverage planning, the proposed method


enables the robot to continuously update its coverage tra-
jectory as new environmental information becomes avail-
able. Experimental evaluations in simulation environments
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in
terms of path length and overlap ratio. Future work will
investigate extensions of the proposed framework to multi-
robot coverage, where the decomposition tree can be further
exploited for online task allocation and coordination among
robots. Another direction is to extend the method to dynamic
environments [29]–[31], where the decomposition structure
needs to adapt to time-varying obstacles.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Shen, J. Song, K. Mittal, and S. Gupta, “An autonomous integrated
system for 3-D underwater terrain map reconstruction,” in Proceedings
OCEANS’16 MTS/IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[2] Z. Shen, J. Song, K. Mittal, and S. Gupta, “Autonomous 3-D mapping
and safe-path planning for underwater terrain reconstruction using
multi-level coverage trees,” in Proceedings OCEANS’17 MTS/IEEE,
2017, pp. 1–6.
[3] Y. Ou, J. Fan, C. Zhou, S. Kang, Z. Zhang, Z.-G. Hou, and M. Tan,
“Structured light-based underwater collision-free navigation and dense
mapping system for refined exploration in unknown dark environ-
ments,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, vol. 55,
no. 1, pp. 110–123, 2025.
[4] E. Vidal, J. D. Hern´andez, K. Istenic, and M. Carreras, “Online
view planning for inspecting unexplored underwater structures.” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1436–1443, 2017.
[5] V. Veeraraghavan, K. Hunte, J. Yi, and K. Yu, “Complete and near-
optimal robotic crack coverage and filling in civil infrastructure,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 40, pp. 2850–2867, 2024.
[6] T. Yang, J. V. Miro, Q. Lai, Y. Wang, and R. Xiong, “Cellular
decomposition for nonrepetitive coverage task with minimum discon-
tinuities,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 1698–1708, 2020.
[7] A. S. Vempati, M. Kamel, N. Stilinovic, Q. Zhang, D. Reusser, I. Sa,
J. Nieto, R. Siegwart, and P. Beardsley, “PaintCopter: An autonomous
UAV for spray painting on three-dimensional surfaces,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 2862–2869, 2018.
[8] P. Maini, B. M. Gonultas, and V. Isler, “Online coverage planning for
an autonomous weed mowing robot with curvature constraints,” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 5445–5452, 2022.
[9] Z. Shen, S. Gupta, S. Zhao, D. Zhou, G. Wang, Z. Ren, Y. Ou, Y. Zhai,
and C. P. Chen, “Coverage path planning: Classical foundations, recent
advances, and future directions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.10649,
2026.
[10] Y. Gabriely and E. Rimon, “Spanning-tree based coverage of contin-
uous areas by a mobile robot,” Annals of Mathematics and Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 31, no. 1-4, pp. 77–98, 2001.
[11] Y. Gabriely and E. Rimon, “Competitive on-line coverage of grid
environments by a mobile robot,” Computational Geometry, vol. 24,
no. 3, pp. 197–224, 2003.
[12] E. Gonzalez, O. Alvarez, Y. Diaz, C. Parra, and C. Bustacara, “BSA:
a complete coverage algorithm,” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2005, pp. 2040–2044.
[13] E. Ferranti, N. Trigoni, and M. Levene, “Brick&Mortar: An on-line
multi-agent exploration algorithm,” in IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, 2007, pp. 761–767.
[14] C. Luo and S. X. Yang, “A bioinspired neural network for real-time
concurrent map building and complete coverage robot navigation in
unknown environments,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
Learning Systems, vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 1279–1298, 2008.
[15] H. H. Viet, V.-H. Dang, M. N. U. Laskar, and T. Chung, “BA*:
an online complete coverage algorithm for cleaning robots,” Applied
Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 217–235, 2013.
[16] J. Song and S. Gupta, “ϵ⋆: An online coverage path planning algo-
rithm,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 526–533,
2018.
[17] M. Hassan and D. Liu, “PPCPP: A predator–prey-based approach to
adaptive coverage path planning,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 284–301, 2019.
[18] Z. Shen, B. Shirose, P. Sriganesh, and M. Travers, “CAP: A
connectivity-aware hierarchical coverage path planning algorithm for
unknown environments using coverage guidance graph,” in IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2025, pp.
13 244–13 249.
[19] Z. Shen, J. P. Wilson, and S. Gupta, “C∗: A coverage path planning
algorithm for unknown environments using rapidly covering graphs,”
IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 42, pp. 1233–1253, 2026.
[20] Z. Shen, J. Song, K. Mittal, and S. Gupta, “CT-CPP: Coverage path
planning for 3D terrain reconstruction using dynamic coverage trees,”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 135–142,
2022.
[21] C. Feng, H. Li, M. Zhang, X. Chen, B. Zhou, and S. Shen, “FC-
Planner: A skeleton-guided planning framework for fast aerial cov-
erage of complex 3D scenes,” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2024, pp. 8686–8692.
[22] Z. Shen, B. Shirose, P. Sriganesh, B. Vundurthy, H. Choset, and
M. Travers, “Multi-CAP: A multi-robot connectivity-aware hierarchi-
cal coverage path planning algorithm for unknown environments,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.14941, 2025.
[23] Z. Wang, X. Lyu, J. Zhang, P. Wang, Y. Zhong, and L. Shi, “MAC-
Planner: A novel task allocation and path planning framework for
multi-robot online coverage processes,” IEEE Robotics and Automa-
tion Letters, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 4404–4411, 2025.
[24] Z. Shen, J. P. Wilson, and S. Gupta, “An online coverage path
planning algorithm for curvature-constrained AUVs,” in OCEANS
2019 MTS/IEEE SEATTLE.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–5.
[25] X. Peng, F. Schwarzentruber, O. Simonin, and C. Solnon, “Spanning-
tree based coverage for a tethered robot,” IEEE Robotics and Automa-
tion Letters, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1888–1895, 2025.
[26] I. Shnaps and E. Rimon, “Online coverage by a tethered autonomous
mobile robot in planar unknown environments,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 966–974, 2014.
[27] Z. Shen, J. P. Wilson, and S. Gupta, “ϵ⋆+: An online coverage path
planning algorithm for energy-constrained autonomous vehicles,” in
Global Oceans 2020: Singapore – U.S. Gulf Coast, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[28] S. Dogru and L. Marques, “ECO-CPP: Energy constrained online
coverage path planning,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 157,
p. 104242, 2022.
[29] Z. Shen, J. P. Wilson, S. Gupta, and R. Harvey, “SMART: Self-
morphing adaptive replanning tree,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 7312–7319, 2023.
[30] Z. Shen, Y. Ou, S. Gupta, S. Zhao, D. Zhou, G. Wang, Z. Ren, J. Fan,
and L. Cheng, “Motion planning in dynamic environments: A survey
from classical to modern methods,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.02677,
2026.
[31] Z. Shen, S. Gupta, S. Zhao, D. Zhou, G. Wang, R. Cheng, Y. Ou,
Z. Ren, Y. Zhai, and C. P. Chen, “Learning-based motion planning
for dynamic environments: From foundational algorithms to emerging
paradigms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.00625, 2026.
