Title: Temporal Attention for Adaptive Control of Euler-Lagrange Systems with Unobservable Memory

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.06877v1

Published Time: Mon, 11 May 2026 00:12:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
# Temporal Attention for Adaptive Control of Euler–Lagrange Systems with Unobservable Memory 

## Giansalvo Cirrincione 1 Adriano Fagiolini 2, ∗

> 1

Laboratoire LTI, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France 

> 2

MIRPALab, Department of Engineering, University of Palermo, 90128 Palermo, Italy 

Correspondence: Adriano Fagiolini, MIRPALab, Department of Engineering, University of Palermo, 90128 Palermo, Italy. Email: fagiolini@unipa.it 

April 2026 

Abstract 

Adaptive control of Euler–Lagrange systems becomes delicate when the friction dynamics are driven by an internal state that decays over a finite horizon but is not directly observ-able from joint measurements. In such a regime the closed-loop response is no longer Markovian in the measured state, and standard certainty-equivalence adaptive laws lose their convergence guarantees. The present paper proposes a meta-control architecture in which the gains of a computed-torque law are produced by a self-attention block that reads a short window of recent mo-tion history. The head count of the attention block is selected prior to policy training, by a surrogate analysis of the auto-covariance of the memory-state gradient along its temporal window; the surrogate is a temporal adaptation of an incremental rank-tracking framework developed in earlier work by the authors. The resulting head count is passed as a fixed architectural hyperparameter to a reinforcement-learning stage, where the policy is trained under a shielded admissibility constraint inherited from a companion paper. On a 2-DOF (two-degree-of-freedom) manipulator with nonlinear friction and variable payload, a single-layer attention-only meta-controller at the selected head count delivers a statistically significant advantage over a deeper Transformer baseline at the short and matched memory regimes: tracking-error reductions of 12 and 19 percentage points respec-tively, with large effect sizes ( d ≈ − 1.1 and −2.1) and Mann–Whitney p < 0.05 in both cases. At the long memory regime the advantage vanishes on a larger sample and four of ten training runs exhibit either divergence or payload-invariant policy collapse, identifying a failure mode specific to the interface between the static Phase-1 head-count prescription and the reinforcement-learning optimisation. The failure-mode analysis motivates a follow-up in which the rank-tracking dynamics are moved inside the reinforcement-learning loop, with runtime pruning and growth of attention heads replacing the static Phase-1/Phase-2 separation. 

Keywords: adaptive control; Euler–Lagrange systems; friction; reinforcement learning; self-attention; neural architecture search; Lyapunov safety. 

1

> arXiv:2605.06877v1 [cs.LG] 7 May 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Rigid-body manipulators tracking a reference trajectory under velocity-dependent friction con-stitute one of the oldest testbeds of adaptive control. When the friction can be written as a known regressor times an unknown parameter vector, the passivity-based adaptive law of Slotine and Li [17] delivers asymptotic tracking by combining a certainty-equivalence feed-forward with a gradient-style update on the parameter estimate. The argument turns on two structural prop-erties: linearity of the dynamics in the unknown parameters, and positive realness of a certain closed-loop operator. Both are preserved for viscous and Coulomb friction. Neither survives when a pre-sliding internal state is introduced, as in the Stribeck and LuGre models [4, 5]: the state carries its own dynamics, decays over a finite horizon, and is not recoverable instanta-neously from the joint kinematics. The closed-loop system is then no longer Markovian in the measured state and the standard adaptive construction no longer applies. A companion paper by the present authors [9] addresses the same regime through safe resid-ual reinforcement learning (RL). A computed-torque baseline is augmented by a Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) policy [12] that outputs a bounded torque correction, while a learned Lyapunov function enforces a decrease condition on every control step by closed-form projection. The construction is empirically effective but structurally limits the reinforcement-learning agent in two respects. First, the action space is the torque vector, which is higher-dimensional than the parametric controller it augments. Second, the agent observes only the instantaneous state: the temporal structure of the unobservable memory is not exposed to the policy. Both limitations are addressed here by a single design choice: the reinforcement-learning policy is lifted to the level of the controller parameters, and its input is extended to a windowed history of recent motion. The policy is therefore not a torque but a mapping from history to gains; the controller it produces is memoryful through the window, even though its functional form remains the computed-torque law. The architecture of this mapping is the subject of the paper. The central architectural question is the number of attention heads that should process the history window. Too few heads and the representation cannot resolve the temporal structure of the memory; too many and the reinforcement-learning optimisation operates in a higher-dimensional parameter space with no corresponding benefit. The proposed answer constructs a surrogate covariance operator from the gradient of the memory state along its temporal win-dow, verifies that its effective rank is a compressed-sensing upper bound on the representational capacity required, and uses the resulting head count as a fixed architectural hyperparameter in the reinforcement-learning stage. The surrogate analysis itself is a temporal adaptation of the incremental rank-tracking framework of [7] and is developed in Section 6. The reinforcement-learning stage and its shielded admissibility machinery are inherited, without modification, from [9]. The separation between the two stages follows the search-then-retrain pattern com-mon in neural architecture search (NAS) [13, 16, 11]; the adoption of that pattern is justified in 2Section 6.3. 

Contributions. The paper contributes three elements. First, a quantitative lower bound on the tracking error achievable by any meta-controller whose input is Markovian in the mea-sured state. The bound scales with the steady-state variance of the unobservable memory and vanishes as the window length exceeds the memory horizon (Proposition 5.12). The bound is informal in the sense that its hypotheses, rather than being structural, reflect the regularity assumed of the cost and of the memory dynamics; the assumptions are made explicit along-side the statement. Second, a temporal residual operator whose effective rank upper-bounds the attention head count required to represent the memory (Proposition 5.15). The operator is con-structed from samples of the gradient of the memory along the window and is independent of the reinforcement-learning objective; its effective rank is non-monotonic in the memory horizon, peaking when the horizon matches the window-time product (Corollary 5.16). Third, an exper-imental evaluation on a 2-DOF manipulator with Stribeck friction. With the head count fixed at the surrogate value, a single-layer attention-only meta-controller improves tracking error by 

12 –19 percentage points over a deeper Transformer baseline at the short and matched memory regimes, with large effect sizes ( d ≈ − 1.1 and d ≈ − 2.1) and Mann–Whitney p < 0.05 in both cases. The advantage is not attributable to window-size tuning: a regime-matched Transformer baseline with window equal to that of the INCRT-1L winner performs indistinguishably from the original Transformer baseline, and INCRT-1L retains a large advantage over it ( d = −2.02 ,

pU = 0 .008 ). At the long memory regime the advantage vanishes on an n = 10 sample and four of ten INCRT-1L training runs exhibit either divergence or a payload-invariant collapse, against at most one of ten for either Transformer variant; this failure-mode asymmetry identifies a lim-itation of the static Phase-1/Phase-2 pipeline at long horizons. The ablation that accompanies the main comparison identifies two further empirical effects: depth without a feed-forward non-linearity causes training to diverge, and the optimal window size is not monotone in the memory horizon — both are consistent with the rank-compression analysis of [8]. 

What is not claimed. The proofs of the two theoretical results are stated under explicit regu-larity assumptions in Section 5 and worked out in Appendix A; they are not structural theorems in the sense of holding under minimal hypotheses. The parameter-efficiency of the proposed meta-controller relative to the Transformer baseline is not uniform: it is substantial at the short-est memory horizon, narrows at the intermediate horizon, and reverses at the longest. The advantage over the Transformer baseline at the long memory horizon, suggested by a n = 5 

pilot study, does not persist on a n = 10 replication: the vanishing gap and the failure-mode cluster identified in Section 7.5 constitute the most informative single outcome of the study with respect to the limits of the approach. The long-horizon regime is therefore the setting in which the proposed method is least effective and in which the follow-up outlined in Section 8 is most likely to yield improvements. 3Organisation. Section 2 reviews the literatures at whose intersection the paper sits. Section 3 formalises the class of systems addressed and fixes notation. Section 4 describes the parameter-level meta-controller and its training loop. Section 5 presents the two theoretical results and their assumptions. Section 6 develops the surrogate head-count analysis and the separation between the architecture-selection and policy-training stages. Section 7 reports the experiments. Section 8 discusses the findings, the limitations, and the companion follow-up agenda. Proofs appear in Appendix A and the experimental protocol in Appendix B. 

# 2 Related work 

This work intersects four literatures: adaptive control of Euler–Lagrange systems with friction, residual reinforcement learning, safe RL with Lyapunov guarantees, and sequence-model ar-chitectures applied to control tasks. The meta-controller we introduce borrows from each but sits in an underexplored region of their intersection. We review each line in turn, close with a short discussion of the relationship with neural architecture search for RL, and finish with a positioning table that summarises the differences with the closest prior works. 

## 2.1 Adaptive control with friction 

Classical adaptive control of Euler–Lagrange systems with velocity-dependent friction has a mature literature [17]. The dominant paradigm combines a computed-torque feedforward term with a parameter-estimation loop that updates friction coefficients online, usually under some persistency-of-excitation condition [5, 4]. The LuGre friction model [5] introduces a one-state internal variable to capture pre-sliding dynamics and stick–slip phenomena, and is the closest classical analogue of the unobservable memory state z(t) treated here. Stribeck-curve fric-tion [4] adds a velocity-dependent envelope that makes the memory dynamics nonlinear in ˙q.Observer-based friction compensation schemes, notably the family of dual-observer designs in, reconstruct the internal state via an auxiliary dynamical system tuned to match the friction memory horizon. These methods provide strong stability guarantees in their regime of validity but require either an accurate parametric model of friction (LuGre) or a sufficiently rich excitation signal. Our approach replaces the parametric estimator with a learned windowed map from recent mo-tion to controller gains, which does not require friction modelling but forfeits the closed-form convergence guarantees of adaptive control. The shielded admissibility framework of Section 5 partially recovers these guarantees by enforcing a Lyapunov-decrease constraint at the level of the meta-controller output. 42.2 Residual reinforcement learning 

Residual reinforcement learning — using RL to learn a corrective term on top of a model-based baseline controller — was introduced in and has seen extensive application in robotic manipula-tion. The paradigm is attractive because the baseline controller handles the bulk of the dynam-ics and the RL policy handles only the unmodeled residual, giving sample-efficient training and safety during exploration. The parent work [9] adopts this paradigm with a computed-torque baseline and a Lyapunov-shielded SAC policy, and addresses the scalability issue that emerges at high-dimensional manipulators (shield activation reaching ∼ 70% ). Our work extends the residual RL paradigm in two directions. First, the RL policy operates at the meta-controller level (controller parameters ) rather than the torque level, which is a more compact action space and which restructures the admissibility constraint into a convex polytope (Lemma 5.2). Second, the meta-controller consumes a windowed history rather than the instan-taneous state, reflecting the unobservable-memory structure of the problem (Definition 5.10). 

## 2.3 Safe RL with Lyapunov guarantees 

Several strands of safe RL enforce stability or constraint satisfaction by coupling RL with clas-sical control theory. Constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs) [2] introduce a dual-multiplier formulation for constraints on cumulative cost, leading to the Lagrangian SAC vari-ants used in this work [1, 19]. Control Barrier Functions (CBFs) [3] enforce a forward-invariant safe set via a quadratic program on the action; the approach has been combined with RL in. Lyapunov-based RL [6] constrains actions to preserve a prespecified (or learned) Lyapunov decrease condition — the family to which the parent work [9] and the present paper belong. The specific contribution of the parent work is a learned Lyapunov function Vψ jointly trained with the shield and the policy. We inherit this object directly. What we add is the observation that the admissibility set derived from Vψ, originally formulated at the torque level, becomes a convex polytope when lifted to the controller-parameter level under the affine-feedforward restriction (Remark 3.1). This restructuring gives Theorem 5.6 and Proposition 5.8, which together explain and resolve the shield-activation anomaly of the parent framework. 

## 2.4 Meta-learning and learned optimisers 

Meta-learning views learning itself as the target of optimisation, with an outer loop that adjusts parameters of an inner learning process. MAML and Reptile train initialisations that adapt rapidly to new tasks. Learned optimisers parameterise update rules with neural networks. In RL specifically, meta-RL frameworks learn policies that adapt online across tasks drawn from a fixed distribution. The meta-controller of the present paper could be viewed as a specialised meta-RL agent that outputs controller gains rather than actions; the meta-MDP structure of Section 4.4 is a compact instance of this view. 5The main distinction from the meta-learning literature is scope: we are not attempting to adapt across a family of tasks with different dynamics; we are adapting across values of a single unobservable parameter ( z(t)) within one physical task. This narrower scope permits the strong stability guarantees of Section 5 that generic meta-RL cannot provide. 

## 2.5 Transformers and attention in robotics and control 

Transformer-based architectures have entered robotics through three main routes. Decision Transformer and Trajectory Transformer recast offline RL as sequence-modeling, predicting returns and actions from context trajectories. RT-1 and RT-2 scale this paradigm to large-scale manipulation demonstrations. Time-series forecasting with causal Transformers, popularised by Informer, TFT, and PatchTST, provides the architectural templates we adopt here: a causal multi-head attention layer over a history window, followed by a feature extractor. The closest work in spirit is that of, who use a Transformer to extract features from re-cent sensor history for a model-predictive controller. Our approach differs in three ways: the attention block is used to parameterise a computed-torque controller rather than to predict ac-tions directly; the training loop is reinforcement learning with a Lyapunov shield rather than supervised learning from demonstrations; and the architecture’s head count is determined by a principled Phase 1 procedure (Section 6) rather than fixed by convention. The algebraic analysis of attention in [8] clarifies the interpretation of several design choices that appear in our ablation. In particular, the distinction between rank-preservation and anti-confinement ([8, Cor. 5.4]) accounts for why a residual connection around multi-head attention materially changes the feature extractor’s output range — an observation that will return in the experimental section. 

## 2.6 Recurrent alternatives and sequence models 

The choice of attention over recurrent sequence models (LSTM, GRU) is not self-evident for control tasks. Recurrent architectures were the dominant sequence model in early deep-RL work. They compress an arbitrarily long history into a fixed-size hidden state, which is attractive for continuous control because it decouples memory from computation per step. The main theoretical argument against recurrent compression in the setting of this paper is coarse measurability: a recurrent policy is a σ-measurable function of the hidden-state tra-jectory, which is strictly coarser than the full history window accessible to an attention-based policy. Proposition 5.12(ii) formalises this argument and predicts that recurrent compression cannot close the Markovian gap at finite capacity. This theoretical expectation is tested em-pirically in Section 7, where both a small and a large GRU underperform even the smallest memoryless MLP across all values of τz .6Table 1. Positioning of the proposed method relative to related works. Policy level : torque-level (T), action-level (A), or controller-parameter level (P). Lyapunov : the formulation includes a formal stability result built on a (learned or designed) Lyapunov function. Arch. determination : the architecture is selected by a principled procedure (rather than by engineering heuristic). Windowed temporal : the policy consumes a fixed-size history window of observations, not a single timestep nor an entire trajectory. Method Policy level Lyapunov Arch. det. Windowed temporal Classical adaptive control [17, 5] T ✓ N/A ✓ (observer) Residual RL (parent) [9] T ✓ × ×

Decision Transformer A × × ✓ (trajectory) CBF-RL A (via CBF) × ×

Transformer-MPC T × × ✓

Recurrent policy-gradient A × × ✓ (recurrent) 

This work P ✓ ✓ ✓

> Policy level : T = torque, A = action (discrete or continuous), P = controller parameters. CBF-RL stands for RL with control barrier functions; Transformer-MPC stands for Transformer-based model predictive control.

## 2.7 Neural architecture search for RL 

Differentiable architecture search [13, 16] has been applied to RL primarily in the image-observation regime [15, 11], where the convolutional backbone dominates the parameter count. The search-then-retrain pattern is the default in this literature: a surrogate search task produces a discrete architecture, which is then trained from scratch on the target RL task. Our use of INCRT in Section 6 follows the search-then-retrain pattern but with two dis-tinctions. First, the surrogate task is specific to the temporal-memory structure of the system (reconstruction of z(t) from history), not a generic reward-prediction proxy as in most differ-entiable NAS. Second, the output of the search is a single scalar (the head count K⋆) rather than a full architectural graph; this reflects the constrained hypothesis class we adopt (atten-tion over a fixed-size window with fixed total capacity), and avoids the known instability of Liu2019DARTS on small search tasks. The INCRT procedure itself is a principled growth-pruning rule rooted in a compressed-sensing bound [7], rather than an empirical gradient-based search, and carries a formal convergence guarantee. 

## 2.8 Positioning 

Table 1 summarises the differences between the proposed meta-controller and the closest ex-isting works along four criteria: the level at which the RL policy operates (torque, action, or controller parameters), whether the formulation includes a formal Lyapunov-based stability guarantee, whether the architecture is determined by a principled procedure, and whether the sequence model exploits a windowed temporal history. To our knowledge the conjunction of all four properties — parameter-level RL, Lyapunov-shielded training, principled architecture determination, and windowed temporal attention — does not appear elsewhere in the literature. 73 Problem setup 

This section formalises the class of systems addressed by the paper and fixes the notation used in Sections 4–7. 

## 3.1 Euler–Lagrange systems with unobservable memory 

We consider rigid-body manipulators with n degrees of freedom described by the Euler–Lagrange equation 

M (q)¨ q + C(q, ˙q) ˙ q + G(q) + F (q, ˙q, z ) = τ, (1) where q ∈ Rn are generalised coordinates, M (q) ≻ 0 is the mass matrix, C(q, ˙q) ˙ q collects Coriolis and centripetal terms, G(q) is the gravity vector, and τ ∈ Rn is the joint torque. The vector F (q, ˙q, z ) models non-conservative effects — in particular, friction — and depends on an internal state z ∈ Rnz that is not directly measured. The evolution of z is governed by its own dynamics 

˙z = ζ(q, ˙q, z ), (2) which is not a function of τ directly but of the motion of the arm. In accordance with Defini-tion 5.10, we require that (i) z be not instantaneously recoverable from (q, ˙q) and (ii) the decay time-constant of ζ, the memory horizon Hz = ∥∂ζ/∂z ∥−1, be finite. 

Running example: Stribeck friction. Throughout Sections 4–7 we take F (q, ˙q, z ) to be the Stribeck friction model 

Fs( ˙ q, z ) = Fc + ( F max  

> s

− Fc) exp  −( ˙ q/v s)2 sign( ˙ q) + σ ˙q + z, (3) with internal state dynamics 

˙z = −z/τ z + λz ˙q. (4) The parameter τz sets the memory horizon of the friction system and is the primary sweep axis of the experimental evaluation. The Stribeck construction is a canonical surrogate for a broader class of unobservable-memory phenomena in manipulation, including joint elasticity, soft-contact hysteresis, and damper dynamics. 

Intuition: memory horizon, window size, and the matched regime. The parameter τz ad-mits a simple physical reading: it is the time constant over which a perturbation to the internal friction state decays. At small τz , a disturbance in z is forgotten within a few control steps and the closed-loop system is nearly Markovian in (q, ˙q); an instantaneous controller suffices. At large τz , a disturbance persists over many control steps and the controller that ignores his-tory tracks a lagged ghost of its own past actions. The design response is to give the controller a 8window of recent observations, of length W control steps. Whether that window is adequate de-pends on the ratio between the memory horizon τz and the window time W ∆t: when the two are of the same order, the window covers one relaxation time of the memory and the window-based controller has access to the full history of the disturbance; when W ∆t is smaller, the window covers only a fraction of the memory and information is lost; when W ∆t is much larger, the window spans many decorrelated memory cycles and the additional tokens are redundant. The intermediate case τz ≈ W ∆t is the matched regime , and is the regime at which the theoretical analysis of Section 5 is most nearly tight and at which the experiments of Section 7 show the clearest advantage of the proposed meta-controller. 

## 3.2 Task and cost 

Given a reference trajectory qd(t), the control task is to track qd under unknown memory state 

z(t) and unknown static parameters (notably the payload p ∈ [pmin , p max ] that modifies the effective mass in M ). The tracking error is e = qd − q; the velocity error ˙e = ˙ qd − ˙q. Following the conventions of the parent work [9], we consider the extended state 

x = ( q, ˙q, e, ˙e, s ) ∈ R5n, (5) where s collects auxiliary variables such as the sliding surface and filtered references. The cost functional is 

J (π) = Ep,z (·),q d(·)

Z T

> 0

ℓ e(t), ˙e(t) dt 



, (6) with ℓ strongly convex in its arguments (e.g., quadratic tracking error with velocity regulari-sation). The expectation is over the task distribution — random payload, random reference, random initial condition — and over the realisation of the memory state z(t) conditional on the motion. 

## 3.3 Controller template 

The torque applied to the manipulator follows the parameterised computed-torque structure 

τ (t) = CT  q, ˙q, q d; Kd(t), Λ( t) + ϕff 

 q, ˙q; η(t), (7) where CT is a standard computed-torque law with gain matrices Kd and Λ, and ϕff is a feed-forward compensation with weights η. The parameters θctrl (t) = ( Kd(t), Λ( t), η (t)) are col-lected into a vector θctrl ∈ P , where P is a compact box fixing the operating ranges of each gain and weight. 

Remark 3.1 (Restriction to affine feed-forward) . Throughout this work we take ϕff to be affine in the feed-forward weights η: ϕff (q, ˙q; η) = Φ( q, ˙q) η, with Φ a state-dependent feature matrix. 9This is the class under which the admissibility set of Section 5 is convex (Lemma 5.2), and the feature matrix Φ may still be the output of an arbitrary deep network without compromising convexity. 

## 3.4 Assumptions 

The theoretical results of Section 5 and the experimental protocol of Section 7 rely on the following standing assumptions. 

Assumption 3.2 (Regularity of the dynamics) . M, C, G are smooth in q, ˙q on the operating set; 

F is continuous in (q, ˙q, z ) and Lipschitz in z; ζ is Lipschitz and generates a contractive flow with rate 1/H z .

Assumption 3.3 (Reference regularity) . qd ∈ C2([0 , T ]) with uniformly bounded derivatives. 

Assumption 3.4 (Parameter compactness) . The parameter set P is a compact box [Kmin  

> d

, K max  

> d

]×

[Λ min , Λmax ] × [ηmin , η max ]dim η.

Assumptions 3.2–3.4 are inherited from [9] and are standard in computed-torque litera-ture [17, 18]. 

# 4 Meta-controller formulation 

We now specify the structure of the learned meta-controller Gθ that produces the parameter trajectory θctrl (t) in (7). The formulation extends the shielded safe-RL framework of [9] from action-level to parameter-level control, and specifies the inputs, outputs, and training loop of the meta-controller. 

## 4.1 Context token 

At each control step tk = k∆t, the meta-controller consumes a context token c(tk) ∈ RW ×dc

formed by stacking W past step-observations 

c(tk) =  o(tk−W +1 ), o (tk−W +2 ), . . . , o (tk), (8) where each step-observation o(t) contains 

o(t) =  q(t), ˙q(t), q d(t), ˙qd(t), ˆp(t), ˆμ(t), t/T  ∈ Rdc . (9) Here ˆp is a noisy estimate of the payload, ˆμ is a friction-regime estimate (fixed at 0.2 in the present setting), and t/T is a phase indicator. For the experiments of Section 7, n = 2 (two-link manipulator), giving dc = 4 n + 3 = 11 ; the total context dimension is W × 11 .10 4.2 Window selection 

The window size W is the unique hyperparameter of the context token that is not fixed by the dynamics. We discuss its selection explicitly because it interacts non-trivially with both the memory horizon τz and the meta-controller architecture. 

Lower bound from Proposition 5.12. Proposition 5.12(iii) establishes that a windowed meta-controller can close the Markovian optimality gap only when W ≥ Hz /∆t, i.e. when the win-dow covers at least one memory horizon of the unobservable state. For the Stribeck model (3)– (4), Hz = τz , so the condition becomes W ≥ τz /∆t. At the sampling rate ∆t = 10 ms used in Section 7, this gives W ≥ 100 for τz = 1 s, W ≥ 200 for τz = 2 s, and W ≥ 500 for τz = 5 s. 

Computational trade-off. The window size controls the cost of attention: the forward pass of a causal multi-head block on a length-W sequence is O(W 2dmodel ). Doubling W quadruples the attention cost, and for practical RL training budgets (tens of thousands of environment steps per episode), windows above W = 100 are significant contributors to training time. 

Our choice. We evaluate W ∈ { 20 , 50 , 100 } in the main experiments of Section 7. The smallest value W = 20 is retained both for continuity with [9] and to expose the regime in which the theoretical lower bound is strictly violated (for τz ≥ 0.2 s). The intermediate value 

W = 50 respects the lower bound at τz ≤ 0.5 s and captures roughly a quarter of the memory horizon at τz = 2 s. The largest W = 100 only respects the lower bound at τz ≤ 1 s; at 

τz = 5 s it still covers only 20% of the memory horizon, which places that regime in the “partial coverage” domain where Proposition 5.12(iii) does not guarantee closing the gap. This imperfect coverage is deliberate: it tests the robustness of the attention-based meta-controller when the theoretical condition is only partially satisfied. The window ablation in Section 7 reports the empirical effect of W at each τz .

## 4.3 Parameter-valued output 

The meta-controller is a map 

Gθ : RW ×dc −→ P , (10) parameterised by θ ∈ Rdθ , that takes a context token c(t) and returns the parameter tuple 

θctrl (t) ∈ P . The architecture of Gθ is an attention-based feature extractor (detailed in Section 6) followed by an MLP head that maps the last-token embedding to a raw action a ∈ Rdim P . The 11 raw action is then passed through a squashing function to land in P:

Kd(t) = Kmin  

> d

+ σ(aK ) ⊙ (Kmax  

> d

− Kmin  

> d

), (11) 

Λ( t) = Λ min + σ(aΛ) ⊙ (Λ max − Λmin ), (12) 

η(t) = ηmax ⊙ tanh( aη), (13) where σ denotes the sigmoid. The structure ensures θctrl (t) ∈ P by construction, so the com-pactness assumption of Section 3.4 is satisfied without further projection. 

## 4.4 SAC training loop 

The meta-controller is trained via Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) [12] on a single-step meta-MDP where: • the state at macro-step k is the context token c(tk);• the action at macro-step k is θctrl (tk) = Gθ(c(tk)) ;• the reward at macro-step k is the negative one-step tracking error −∥ e(tk+1 )∥2, with 

e(tk+1 ) computed by rolling out the closed-loop dynamics of Section 3 for one control period under the action θctrl (tk);• the episode terminates at tK = T (fixed horizon) or on numerical divergence of the dynamics. SAC is selected because its entropy regularisation is well-matched to the non-stationarity of the meta-MDP (the distribution of z(t) conditional on the history changes across episodes and across the payload). The alternative of parameter-level TRPO or PPO was explored in pilot experiments and produced less stable training on this task. 

Shielded admissibility. The admissibility constraint of Section 5 is enforced via the La-grangian reformulation 

min  

> θ

E

Z T

> 0

ℓ(e, ˙e) dt 



+ β Edist  Gθ(c(t)) , Πadm (x(t))  , (14) with dual multiplier β tuned by the standard Lagrangian update rule of [2]. At runtime, a projection onto Πadm (x(t)) is applied as a final safety net (Theorem 5.6(b)); at convergence of the Lagrangian, the projection is inactive (Proposition 5.8). 

## 4.5 Summary of architectural degrees of freedom 

The meta-controller thus has the following architectural parameters: 12 • window W (Section 4.2); • attention head count K and per-head dimension dk, jointly determining the model dimen-sion dmodel = K · dk;• number of stacked attention layers L;• presence of a per-token feed-forward block after each attention layer; • width of the subsequent MLP head (fixed at [64 , 64] throughout). Of these, K is fixed from Phase 1 INCRT as described in Section 6. The remaining four hyper-parameters (W, d k, L, FFN) are ablated in Section 7 to characterise the contribution of each to tracking performance across the memory-horizon range τz ∈ { 1, 2, 5} s. 

# 5 Theoretical Framework 

This section develops the four results that underpin the proposed meta-controller. Sections 5.1– 5.3 extend the shielded safe-RL framework of the parent work [9] from action-level to parameter-level control. Section 5.4 establishes a quantitative lower bound on the tracking error attainable by any Markovian meta-controller, thereby motivating the use of windowed temporal attention. Section 5.5 specialises the INCRT head-count analysis of [7] to the temporal residual operator relevant for meta-control, and closes the theoretical loop by showing that the window size W

and the head count K can be independently selected from task-specific quantities. 

## 5.1 Admissible parameter set 

Let Vψ : R5n → R≥0 be the learned Lyapunov function inherited from [9]: structured quadratic, positive-definite outside the target, and Lψ-Lipschitz in ∇Vψ. Fix a desired decay rate α > 0.

Definition 5.1 (Admissible parameter set) . For every state x = ( q, ˙q, e, ˙e, s ) ∈ R5n,

Πadm (x) :=  θctrl ∈ P : ˙Vψ(x; θctrl ) + αV ψ(x) ≤ 0 , (15) where ˙Vψ(x; θctrl ) denotes the instantaneous Lyapunov rate along the closed-loop trajectory in-duced by the computed-torque (CT) law with parameters θctrl = ( Kd, Λ, η ), and P is a compact box in Rm enforcing the operating ranges of each gain and feed-forward weight. Writing τ = CT( θctrl ) + ϕff (η) and using the affine–in– τ structure of the shield inequality derived in [9, Sec. IV], 

b(x)⊤τ ≤ c(x), b(x) := ∇ ˙qVψ · g(x), c(x) := −αV ψ(x) − ∇ Vψ · f (x),

13 the CT contribution expands as 

b(x)⊤CT( q, ˙q, q d; Kd, Λ) = K⊤ 

> d

A1(x) + Λ ⊤A2(x) + a0(x), (16) 

b(x)⊤ϕff (q, ˙q; η) = η⊤B(x) + b0(x), (17) with A1, A 2, B state-dependent vectors and a0, b 0 state-dependent scalars. 

Lemma 5.2 (Convexity of Πadm (x)). Fix x ∈ R5n. If the feed-forward map ϕff (q, ˙q; η) is affine in η — that is, ϕff (q, ˙q; η) = Φ( q, ˙q) η for a state-dependent feature matrix Φ — then Πadm (x)

is a (possibly unbounded) convex polytope: the intersection of the box P with the single affine half-space 

K⊤ 

> d

A1(x) + Λ ⊤A2(x) + η⊤B(x) +  a0(x) + b0(x) ≤ c(x). (18) 

Proof. The constraint defining Πadm (x) is affine in θctrl = ( Kd, Λ, η ) by (16) and (17); the intersection of a half-space with the compact convex box P is convex. 

Remark 5.3 (Nonlinear feed-forward) . If ϕff is nonlinear in η, the half-space becomes a smooth sublevel set of a smooth function; convexity may fail. In practice we restrict to the affine class, which forfeits no expressiveness at the meta-controller level since the feature matrix Φ( q, ˙q) can itself be the output of a deep network. 

Assumption 5.4 (Non-emptiness) . For every x in the operating set X ⊂ R5n, Πadm (x)∩P̸ = ∅.

This is the meta-level analogue of the drift-decay condition on the control-degeneracy set 

Z in [9]. It asserts that at every state there exists at least one gain choice compatible with the prescribed Lyapunov decrease. 

## 5.2 Stability under parameter modulation 

Let Gθ : Rnc → P be the learned meta-controller mapping a context token c(t) ∈ Rnc to a parameter tuple θctrl (t).

Assumption 5.5 (Bounded context velocity) . The context token c(t) is piecewise-C1 and satis-fies ∥ ˙c(t)∥ ≤ Vc for all t ≥ 0.

Under the chain rule, 

∥ ˙θctrl (t)∥ ≤ LGθ ∥ ˙c(t)∥ ≤ LGθ Vc, (19) where LGθ is the Lipschitz constant of Gθ on a compact set containing the context trajectory. 

Theorem 5.6 (Stability under parameter modulation) . Let Gθ be LGθ -Lipschitz, let Assump-tion 5.4 hold, and let Assumption 5.5 hold. Suppose either (a) Gθ(c(t)) ∈ Πadm (x(t)) for all t ≥ 0, or 

14 (b) a runtime projection θctrl (t) = Π Πadm (x(t)) 

 Gθ(c(t))  is applied. Then the closed-loop system satisfies ˙Vψ(x(t)) + αV ψ(x(t)) ≤ 0 for all t, hence Vψ(x(t)) ≤

Vψ(x(0)) e−αt , and the tracking error ∥e(t)∥ decays exponentially at rate α/ 2.Proof. Under (a), the definition of Πadm directly gives ˙Vψ + αV ψ ≤ 0. Under (b), the projection onto Πadm (x(t)) is well-defined (by Lemma 5.2) and feasible (by Assumption 5.4), and pre-serves the inequality by construction. In either case, Vψ(t) ≤ Vψ(0) e−αt . Since Vψ is quadratic in e and bounded below by λmin ∥e∥2 for some λmin > 0, the tracking error decays at rate 

α/ 2.

Remark 5.7 (Two regimes) . Case (a) corresponds to the training-only regime: if Gθ has been trained to respect the admissibility constraint, no runtime machinery is needed. Case (b) is the 

runtime-shielded regime: Gθ is trained unconstrained and projected at runtime. In practice we combine the two via a Lagrangian training objective plus a runtime projection as a safety net. 

## 5.3 Shield activation at the optimum 

A distinctive finding of the 7-DOF scalability study in [9] was shield activation reaching ∼

70% when the policy and shield were trained as adversaries. The meta-controller formulation corrects this. 

Proposition 5.8 (Vanishing shield activation at the optimum) . Let bGθ be the optimum of the constrained Lagrangian objective 

min  

> θ

Eτ ∼πθ

Z T

> 0

ℓ(q, q d) dt 



subject to Gθ(c(t)) ∈ Πadm (x(t)) almost surely . (20) 

Then the shield activation fraction at bGθ is zero. In a finite-training regime, the shield activation fraction is bounded by 

Pshield ≤ C · Edist  Gθ(c), Πadm (x) , (21) 

which vanishes as the Lagrangian training converges. Proof. The shield fires if and only if the policy output is infeasible. Under Slater’s condition, which holds by Assumption 5.4, strong duality gives almost-sure constraint satisfaction at the optimum. In a finite-training regime, the feasibility gap is dominated by the expected distance of the policy output from the feasible set, yielding (21); C depends on the Lipschitz constants of b(x) and c(x) in Lemma 5.2. 

Remark 5.9 (Interpretation) . The parent framework [9] treats shield activation as an emergent quantity with no predicted value; the meta-controller framework makes it predictable and small by design. The ∼ 70% activation rate observed in the 7-DOF study is thereby attributed to the adversarial training regime, not to a structural limitation. 15 5.4 The Markovian optimality gap 

We now establish the core result motivating the use of windowed temporal attention. 

Definition 5.10 (System with unobservable memory) . An Euler–Lagrange system has unob-servable memory if there exists an internal state z(t) ∈ Rnz with dynamics ˙z = ζ(q, ˙q, z ) such that: (i) z(t) is not directly measured by the sensor suite; (ii) the steady-state value of z given (q, ˙q) is not a function of (q, ˙q) alone, but depends on the history {q(s), ˙q(s) : s ≤ t};(iii) the memory horizon Hz := ∥∂ζ/∂z ∥−1 is finite. 

Example 5.11 (Stribeck friction) . The Stribeck friction model Fs( ˙ q, z ) with ˙z = −z/τ z + λz ˙q

satisfies Definition 5.10 with memory horizon Hz = τz .Denote by θ⋆

> ctrl

(t) the time-optimal parameter trajectory — the one that minimises expected tracking error over a realisation of the task distribution — and by ℓ⋆ the associated expected cost. For a meta-controller G, let ℓ(G) denote its expected cost. The next result quantifies, under regularity assumptions on the cost, the price paid by a Markovian meta-controller that ignores the unobservable memory. The result is stated in infor-mal form: the hypotheses express the regularity required for the argument to go through and are not minimal in the structural sense. A more general formulation, removing the strong-convexity assumption or weakening the observability assumption on z(t), would require substantially more machinery than is developed here and is left to future work. 

Proposition 5.12 (Markovian optimality gap, informal) . Let the system satisfy Definition 5.10 with memory horizon Hz , and suppose the following regularity conditions hold: (R1) the instantaneous cost ℓ(θctrl ; q, ˙q, z ) is twice continuously differentiable and strongly con-vex in θctrl with modulus μ > 0;(R2) the sensitivity κ = ∥∂2ℓ/∂z ∂θ ctrl ∥ is bounded and positive on a neighbourhood of the reference trajectory; (R3) the conditional variance σ2 

> z

= E[ Var( z(t) | q(t), ˙q(t)) ] is finite and strictly positive. Then: (i) The time-optimal parameter trajectory depends on the full history: 

θ⋆

> ctrl

(t) = θ⋆

> ctrl

 {q(s), ˙q(s), z (s) : s ≤ t}, (22) 

and is not a function of (q(t), ˙q(t)) alone. 

16 (ii) Any Markovian meta-controller GMk : ( q, ˙q) 7 → P incurs an expected excess cost bounded below by 

E[ℓ(GMk )] − ℓ⋆ ≥ c1 σ2 

> z

, (23) 

where σ2 

> z

= E[ Var( z(t) | q(t), ˙q(t)) ] is the conditional variance of z given the current state, and c1 = μ κ 2/2 with κ the sensitivity of the cost to z.(iii) A windowed meta-controller GW : ( q, ˙q, history of length W ) 7 → P with W ≥ Hz and sufficient representational capacity can reduce the excess cost to o(σ2 

> z

).Proof sketch. Part (i) follows from the hidden-state identifiability principle for systems with unobservable memory: since z(t) enters the optimal control law through the state equation and 

z(t) is not σ(q, ˙q)-measurable by Definition 5.10(ii), neither is the optimiser. Part (ii) is an application of the information bottleneck argument: the output of GMk is σ(q, ˙q)-measurable, which is strictly coarser than σ(q, ˙q, z ). Strong convexity of the cost with modulus μ, combined with the conditional variance identity Var( θ⋆ | q, ˙q) ≥ κ2σ2 

> z

(where κ = ∥∂θ ⋆/∂z ∥), yields (23). Part (iii) follows because the joint process {(q(s), ˙q(s)) : s ∈ [t − W, t ]} is sufficient for z(t) whenever W ≥ Hz : in particular, the identifiability map {q(s), ˙q(s)}s∈[t−W,t ] 7 → z(t)

is measurable, and a universal approximator with attention over the window can implement it. The full argument is given in Appendix A.1. 

Remark 5.13 (Scaling of σ2 

> z

with τz ). For linear unobservable-memory dynamics ˙z = −z/τ z +

λz ˙q driven by a zero-mean second-order stationary process ˙q, the stationary conditional variance 

σ2 

> z

is monotonically increasing in τz :

σ2 

> z

(τz ) = λ2 

> z

· τz

2 ·  1 − ρ ˙q(τz ), (24) where ρ ˙q(τ ) is the autocorrelation of ˙q at lag τ . In particular, σ2 

> z

→ 0 as τz → 0 (instantaneous memory) and σ2 

> z

→ λ2 

> z

E[ ˙ q2]/2 as τz → ∞ (long memory saturation). The derivation is given in Appendix A.2. 

Corollary 5.14 (Empirical implication) . Proposition 5.12 predicts a regime-dependent ordering of meta-controllers: at τz → 0, a memoryless policy is optimal ( σ2 

> z

→ 0, Markovian gap vanishes); at moderate τz , memoryless policies degrade at rate c1 σ2 

> z

; at τz ≳ W ·∆t, windowed attention recovers optimal performance. The crossover point is operationally testable and is reported in Section 7. 

## 5.5 Temporal head-count bound 

Proposition 5.12(iii) establishes that a windowed meta-controller with sufficient capacity closes the Markovian gap. What remains is to quantify “sufficient capacity”. 17 The INCRT framework of [7] provides a principled determination of the required number of attention heads through a residual-matrix construction. We briefly recall the relevant elements before stating the adaptation to the temporal setting. 

INCRT residual operator. Given a training signal represented as a matrix Y ∈ RW ×dtask ,INCRT constructs a residual operator Ares ∈ Rd×d whose spectrum determines the head count required to represent Y [7, Thm. 7]. Under three structural properties of Ares — symmetry, rank-one deflation, and incoherence of the deflated directions — Theorem 7 of the INCRT paper gives the compressed-sensing upper bound on the head count necessary to reconstruct the signal up to an ϵ-residual. 

Temporal adaptation. In the meta-control setting, the relevant residual operator acts on the 

temporal domain of the history window rather than on the feature domain. Specifically, define 

Atemp res = E∇hist z(t) ∇hist z(t)⊤ ∈ RW ×W , (25) the auto-covariance matrix of the gradient of z(t) with respect to the history of lookbacks. The next result imports a compressed-sensing bound from the static INCRT framework to the temporal operator. It is stated in informal form: the three structural hypotheses (symmetry, rank-one deflation, and incoherence) are exactly the hypotheses of [7, Thm. 7], and are verified for Atemp res under the regularity conditions (R1)–(R3) and the mild additional assumption that the autocorrelation of ˙q does not vanish identically in the window. A full proof with minimal hypotheses is beyond the scope of the present paper. 

Proposition 5.15 (Temporal head-count bound, informal) . Under the regularity conditions of Proposition 5.12 and the assumption that the autocorrelation of ˙q on the window interval 

[−W ∆t, 0] is strictly positive at lag zero and does not vanish identically at any other lag, the operator Atemp res defined by (25) satisfies the three structural properties (symmetry, rank-one deflation, and incoherence) required by [7, Thm. 7]. Consequently, the optimal head count for the temporal attention operator is upper-bounded by 

K⋆(τz ) ≤ C · reff 

 Atemp res (τz ), (26) 

where reff (·) is the effective rank (stable rank) and C is a universal constant inherited from [7, Thm. 7]. Proof sketch. Symmetry of Atemp res is immediate from its definition as a covariance matrix. Rank-one deflation follows from the fact that the gradient of z(t) with respect to the history is domi-nated by a single scalar multiplier at each lag (the coefficient λz of the ˙q term in ˙z). Incoherence of the deflated directions follows from the non-degenerate autocorrelation of ˙q away from zero 18 lag. The three properties are verified in detail in Appendix A.3, and the compressed-sensing bound of [7, Thm. 7] applies directly. 

Corollary 5.16 (Non-monotonic K⋆(τz )). The effective rank reff (Atemp res (τz )) is non-monotonic in τz : it increases with τz in the regime τz ≲ W · ∆t (more of the memory horizon fits inside the window, more temporal modes can be separated) and decreases with τz in the regime τz ≳

W ·∆t (the window saturates, only low-frequency modes remain distinguishable). The maximum of reff occurs near τz ≈ W · ∆t/ 2. Proof in Appendix A.4. 

Design implication. Propositions 5.12 and 5.15 give two independent ingredients for select-ing the meta-controller architecture: • the window size W is selected as W ≥ Hz /∆t, so that the window covers the memory horizon (Proposition 5.12(iii)); • the head count K is selected as K ≤ C · reff (Atemp res ), which is non-monotonic in τz with a peak near τz ≈ W · ∆t/ 2 (Proposition 5.15 and Corollary 5.16). The two selections are decoupled: W is determined by the memory horizon of the system, K by the rank structure of the temporal residual operator. Section 6 operationalises the selection of 

K via the Phase 1 INCRT procedure, and Section 7 validates the decoupling empirically across a grid of (K, d k, L, W ) combinations. 

## 5.6 Summary of the theoretical roadmap 

The four results established in this section assemble into a single design prescription. Lemma 5.2 ensures that the admissible parameter set is a convex polytope and that the runtime projec-tion of Theorem 5.6(b) is well-defined. Theorem 5.6 guarantees closed-loop stability under any Lipschitz meta-controller whose output lies in (or is projected onto) the admissible set. Proposition 5.8 predicts that shield activation vanishes at the optimum of the constrained La-grangian, resolving the ∼ 70% activation anomaly of the parent framework. Proposition 5.12 establishes the lower bound c1σ2 

> z

on the Markovian-policy error and the upper bound o(σ2 

> z

) on the windowed-policy error, with σ2 

> z

growing monotonically in τz . Proposition 5.15 provides the head-count bound for the temporal attention operator, and Corollary 5.16 predicts non-monotonic K⋆(τz ) with a peak near the window-to-horizon matched regime. The experimental section tests each prediction in turn. 

# 6 INCRT for architecture determination 

Proposition 5.15 leaves unanswered a practical question: given a system with memory horizon 

τz , how is the head-count bound K⋆(τz ) computed so as to feed into the design of the Phase 2 19 trajectory                       

> simulator
> τz,Δt,W
> PHASE 1 — architecture selection
> offline, CPU-only, seconds to minutes
> Atemp res (τz)
> auto-covariance of
> ∇hist z
> INCRT
> grow / prune
> on residual
> head-count bound K⋆
> K⋆≤C⋅reff
> PHASE 2 — policy training
> online, GPU, hours
> grid over
> K∈ [ K⋆/2, K⋆]
> SAC training
> shielded adm.
> meta-controller
> Gθ:W→ ( Kd, Λ, η)
> K⋆

Figure 1. Two-phase architecture-selection pipeline. Phase 1 returns a head-count bound K⋆ from an offline analysis of the memory structure; Phase 2 runs a constrained grid search over K and trains the selected policy. 

meta-controller? The answer developed in this section decomposes into two stages, rendered schematically in Figure 1. In the first stage, run offline and on a CPU, the trajectory simulator produces short rollouts at the target horizon; a temporal residual operator is assembled from these rollouts, its effective rank is estimated by the incremental rank-tracking procedure of [7], and a single integer K⋆ is returned. In the second stage, run on a GPU for the reinforcement-learning training, the integer K⋆ is used to bound a short grid search over the head count of the attention block; the best head count on the grid is then retained and the corresponding policy is trained to convergence under the shielded admissibility constraint of Section 4.4. The first stage is the architecture-selection phase and takes seconds to minutes; the second stage is the policy-training phase and takes hours. Architecture selection and policy optimisation are therefore decoupled, and the end product is a meta-controller with no runtime growing or pruning machinery. The separation follows the search-then-retrain pattern common in neural architecture search [13, 16, 15]. 

## 6.1 The INCRT framework 

INCRT [7] is an incremental construction of a sparse signal decomposition based on a residual matrix that evolves across growth and pruning iterations. We summarise only the elements needed in the sequel; a full development is available in the reference. 

Residual matrix. Given a training signal Y ∈ Rn×d and a candidate rank-K decomposition 

Y ≈ PKk=1 ukv⊤ 

> k

with uk ∈ Rn, vk ∈ Rd, the residual matrix is 

A(K)res = Y Y ⊤ −

> K

X

> k=1

ukv⊤ 

> k

· (ukv⊤ 

> k

)⊤. (27) 20 The effective rank reff (A(K)res ) measures the residual spectral mass not yet explained by the first 

K components. 

Growth signal. At each iteration t, INCRT proposes a candidate new direction (uK+1 , v K+1 )

obtained from the leading eigenvector of the current residual. The growth signal quantifies the reduction in effective rank that would result from adding the candidate: 

g(t) 

> K+1

= reff (A(K)res ) − reff (A(K+1) res ). (28) When g(t) 

> K+1

exceeds a prescribed threshold γadd , the direction is accepted and K ← K + 1 .

Pruning. Symmetrically, if the contribution of a previously admitted direction falls below a threshold γprune , the direction is removed and K ← K − 1. Growth and pruning are comple-mentary operations on a single homeostatic loop. 

Bidirectional gate. The gate mechanism of [7, Sec. 4] ensures numerical stability of the growth–pruning alternation: directions that oscillate across the growth and pruning thresholds are stabilised by an averaging filter with time constant governed by the NTK-alignment rate at the current K.

Homeostatic convergence. [7, Thm. 6] establishes that the joint dynamics converge to a fixed-point rank K⋆ characterised by the effective rank of Ares : no candidate growth exceeds 

γadd and no candidate pruning exceeds γprune at K = K⋆.

Compressed-sensing bound. [7, Thm. 7] bounds K⋆ from above by a compressed-sensing inequality applied to Ares under three structural hypotheses: symmetry, rank-one deflation, and incoherence of the deflated directions. When these hypotheses hold, 

K⋆ ≤ C · reff 

 Ares 

, (29) where C is a universal constant. This is the inequality we exploit in the temporal adaptation below. 

## 6.2 Temporal residual operator 

The residual matrix of INCRT is constructed over the feature domain of the training signal Y .For meta-control with unobservable memory, however, the quantity to be recovered is not a feature–space latent but a function of the temporal history of observations: specifically, z(t)

as a map of the past W observation steps. The natural adaptation is therefore to construct a residual operator over the time domain rather than the feature domain. 21 Design choices. Three candidate constructions were considered: 

(v1) Feature-space residual. Direct application of the standard INCRT construction with Y

taken as the observation feature matrix over a batch of histories. This yields K⋆ approxi-mately constant (between 3 and 5) across the range τz ∈ [0 .2, 5] s — the feature dimension does not encode the memory structure of the task. 

(v2) Multi-horizon prediction target. Y is replaced with a stack of future-horizon predictions of the observation, horizon-indexed. This exposes some temporal structure but K⋆(τz )

remains flat at ≈ 5 throughout the range: the future-horizon stack dilutes the memory dependence. 

(v3) Temporal residual operator. Y is replaced with a history matrix indexed by temporal lag. The residual operator becomes Atemp res ∈ RW ×W , and K⋆(τz ) varies non-monotonically with τz as predicted by Corollary 5.16. Only the third construction, developed in detail below, exhibits the expected regime depen-dence; the first two are not pursued further. 

Construction of Atemp res . Let HW (t) = ( q(t), q (t−1) , . . . , q (t−W +1) , ˙q(t), . . . , ˙q(t−W +1)) 

be the history window at time t. Define the temporal gradient of the memory state: 

∇hist z(t) := ∂z (t)

∂HW (t) ∈ RW . (30) The temporal residual operator is the auto-covariance of this gradient, evaluated over a training set of trajectories sampled at the target τz :

Atemp res (τz ) = E∇hist z(t) ∇hist z(t)⊤ . (31) By Proposition 5.15 the three structural hypotheses of [7, Thm. 7] are satisfied, so the INCRT growth and pruning dynamics apply to Atemp res without modification, and the resulting K⋆(τz ) is compressed-sensing-bounded by the effective rank of the operator. 

## 6.3 Phase 1 / Phase 2 separation 

We now describe the architectural role of INCRT in the present paper, which is different from, and more conservative than, the use in the original JMLR work. 

Phase 1: architecture search. The INCRT dynamics run on the surrogate temporal-representation task defined by Atemp res . The task is supervised and computationally inexpensive compared to SAC training: it requires only the ability to simulate z(t) from the system dynamics and to sample histories HW (t). The output of Phase 1 is the converged head count K⋆(τz ) for each τz

of interest. 22 Phase 2: fixed-architecture policy training. The Phase 2 meta-controller is a standard attention-based feature extractor with K⋆ heads — fixed for the duration of the SAC training. There is no growth or pruning during Phase 2: K⋆ is an architectural hyperparameter, not a dynamic variable. 

Why search-then-retrain. Three reasons motivate this separation: (i) Optimisation disentanglement. Running INCRT dynamics concurrently with SAC train-ing would require the SAC critic to track a non-stationary policy-parameter dimension, a known source of training instabilities in actor-critic RL even when the architecture change is slow. (ii) Deployment. A fixed-architecture Phase 2 yields a meta-controller with a specified pa-rameter count, latency profile, and memory footprint, all determined at design time. (iii) Empirical testability. The surrogate-optimal K⋆ may or may not coincide with the RL-optimal head count in Phase 2; separating the two stages makes this difference empirically tractable (Section 7). This pattern aligns with the practice of differentiable neural architecture search [13, 16]: a search stage on a surrogate task produces a discrete architecture, which is then trained from scratch on the target task. 

Scope note on INCRT usage. The present paper uses INCRT exclusively in its architecture-search role. The broader homeostatic-dynamics interpretation of [7], including its connection to representational completeness in deep architectures [8], is not invoked here. An extension that runs INCRT directly inside Phase 2 — effectively a dynamic-architecture meta-controller — is a natural follow-up indicated in Section 8. 

## 6.4 Phase 1 surrogate protocol 

Algorithm 1 summarises the Phase 1 procedure used in the present work. 

Implementation notes. In the experiments of Section 7, W = 20 , N = 2048 , γadd = 0 .05 ,

γprune = 0 .01 , and nstable = 20 . The trajectory simulator is the same Euler–Lagrange model used in Phase 2, with a perturbed Stribeck friction to generate the z(t) training signal (protocol in Appendix B). 

## 6.5 Phase 1 results: K⋆(τz)

Algorithm 1 was run for five values of the memory horizon, τz ∈ { 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0} s. Table 2 reports the converged head count K⋆ together with the effective rank reff of the temporal residual operator at convergence. 23 Algorithm 1 Phase 1 INCRT architecture search for temporal meta-control 

Require: Memory horizon τz ; window W ; growth / pruning thresholds γadd , γ prune ; trajectory simulator; sample size N .

Ensure: Converged head count K⋆(τz ). 

> 1:

Sample N trajectories of the Euler–Lagrange system at horizon τz ; compute HW (t) and 

z(t) along each trajectory.  

> 2:

Form the temporal residual operator bAtemp res (τz ) as the empirical auto-covariance of ∇hist z

over the N samples.  

> 3:

Initialise K ← 1; U ← (u1) with u1 the leading eigenvector of bAtemp res ; residual R ← bAtemp res . 

> 4:

repeat  

> 5:

Growth step. Propose uK+1 as the leading eigenvector of R. Compute the growth signal 

g ← reff (R) − reff (R − uK+1 u⊤

> K+1

). 

> 6:

if g > γ add then K ← K + 1 ; U ← (U, u K+1 ); R ← R − uK u⊤ 

> K

. 

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

Pruning step. For each k ∈ { 1, . . . , K }, compute pk ← u⊤ 

> k

Ru k/∥R∥F . 

> 9:

if min k pk < γ prune then drop the least-contributing direction from U ; K ← K − 1;recompute R. 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

Gate update. Apply the bidirectional gate of [7, Sec. 4] to smooth the growth/pruning decision against oscillation.  

> 12:

until K remains unchanged for nstable iterations (homeostatic convergence of [7, Thm. 6])  

> 13:

return K⋆(τz ) ← K.

Table 2. Phase 1 INCRT results. K⋆ is the converged head count from Algorithm 1; reff =tr( Atemp res )2/∥Atemp res ∥2 

> F

; relative lag means τz /(W ∆t).

τz (s) relative lag K⋆ reff 

1.0 5.0 8 9.3 2.0 10.0 14 14.8 3.0 15.0 8 10.1 4.0 20.0 9 11.4 5.0 25.0 11 12.0 

Non-monotonic pattern. The observed K⋆(τz ) is non-monotonic, with a sharp peak at τz =2 s corresponding to the matched regime τz ≈ W ∆t · 10 . This matches the prediction of Corol-lary 5.16 scaled by the nonlinearity factor introduced by the Stribeck envelope (Appendix A.4). At τz = 1 s (relative lag 5), the window contains a strictly shorter portion of a rapidly-decaying memory, and only K⋆ = 8 principal directions are identified. At τz ≥ 3 s (relative lag ≥ 15 ), the leading temporal mode dominates the spectrum and K⋆ plateaus below the peak. 

Passing K⋆ to Phase 2. The values in Table 2 define the head counts of the Phase 2 meta-controller at the corresponding memory horizons. In combination with the window W = 20 

(chosen to satisfy the W ≥ Hz /∆t condition of Proposition 5.12(iii) at the worst case τz =5 s, albeit only marginally), K⋆ specifies the attention partition exactly. The remaining design degrees of freedom — per-head dimension dk, number of stacked layers L, presence of a feed-24 forward non-linearity, and window size W itself — are not fixed by the Phase 1 procedure; they are the subject of the ablation in Section 7. 

Relation to the algebraic framework of [8]. The scalar K⋆ returned by Algorithm 1 quan-tifies the representational capacity required in the attention mechanism for the given temporal task; it does not specify the non-linear capacity required downstream of the attention. The latter is a separate quantity, called non-linear complexity in [8, §8], and is determined in Phase 2 via the presence (or absence) of a per-token feed-forward layer and its width. The experiments of Section 7 therefore include an explicit (L, FFN , W ) ablation on top of the K⋆ choice from Phase 1. 

# 7 Experimental results 

The empirical study has two purposes: to measure the tracking-error reduction delivered by the proposed meta-controller relative to a Transformer baseline at three memory regimes, and to probe the architectural choices on which that reduction depends. The study is conducted on the 2-DOF manipulator with Stribeck friction introduced in Section 3.1; payload is sampled uniformly from [0 , 1.5] kg at every episode reset. The reference trajectory is a sinusoid in each joint with periods incommensurate within the episode horizon of T = 5 s. 

## 7.1 Protocol 

All meta-controllers are trained with SAC [12] for 50 000 environment steps under the shielded admissibility constraint described in Section 4.4. The simulator integrates the Euler–Lagrange dynamics with a Runge–Kutta step of ∆t = 10 ms, giving H = 500 control steps per episode. Evaluation at convergence is performed at five payload levels p ∈ { 0, 0.375 , 0.75 , 1.125 , 1.5} kg, with 20 rollouts per level. Non-architectural hyperparameters are held constant across all archi-tectures and regimes and are documented in Appendix B. The training code and per-seed result files are released with the paper. The baseline against which each architecture is compared is a computed-torque controller with fixed gains Kd = 30 , Λ = 5 and no meta-controller. The metric of primary interest is the relative reduction of tracking RMSE (root-mean-square error), ∆% := ( RMSE meta −

RMSE base )/RMSE base ; a negative value indicates that the learned meta-controller outperforms the fixed-gain reference. The baseline RMSE is 0.132 ± 0.001 at every memory regime; it is insensitive to τz because the fixed-gain law does not exploit the memory. Two architectures are compared. The first is INCRT-1L, a single-layer pre-LN self-attention block with residual connection, no feed-forward sub-layer, and head count K drawn from the interval [⌈K⋆/2⌉, K ⋆] suggested by the Phase 1 analysis of Section 6.5; per-head dimension is 

dk = 16 throughout. The window W is selected per regime from the ablation reported in Sec-25 Table 3. Head counts: Phase 1 surrogate value K⋆ (from Table 2), Phase 2 ablation range [⌈K⋆/2⌉, K ⋆],and the retained Phase 2 value used in Table 4. dmodel = K · dk with dk = 16 .                   

> τz(s) K⋆(Phase 1) Phase-2 range Retained K(Phase 2) 18{4, . . . , 8}4
> 214 {7, . . . , 14 }7
> 511 {6, . . . , 11 }8

tion 7.4. The second is a Transformer baseline in the configuration inherited from the compan-ion paper [9]: two stacked TransformerEncoderLayer blocks with GELU feed-forward, 

K = 4 heads, dk = 16 , and W = 20 fixed across regimes. The Transformer configuration is deliberately not tuned per regime: it represents a single reusable black-box baseline with no architectural access to the memory horizon, against which the regime-matched INCRT-1L meta-controller is compared. Each of the six cells defined by the two architectures and the three memory regimes τz ∈{1, 2, 5} s is trained five times with seeds {42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 }, yielding thirty training runs. The protocol was fixed a priori ; no seed was removed from any reported statistic. 

Statistical tests. The reported statistical comparisons use Mann–Whitney’s U test [14] as the primary test, with Welch’s t test [20] reported for robustness to distributional assumptions. Effect sizes use Cohen’s d with pooled variance [10]; values |d| ≥ 0.5 are conventionally medium, |d| ≥ 0.8 large. The non-parametric test is preferred in view of the small sample size per cell and the presence of an identifiable outlier discussed in Section 7.5. 

## 7.2 Head count: from Phase 1 to Phase 2 

The head counts used in the main comparison are reported in Table 3, together with the Phase 1 surrogate values K⋆ of Table 2 and the (K, d k) combinations retained after the Phase 2 ablation. The interaction between Phase 1 and Phase 2 is the following. The surrogate rank K⋆(τz )

is an upper bound on the number of attention heads that can carry distinct temporal information through the window, assuming the three structural hypotheses of Proposition 5.15. It does not, however, prescribe a specific head count for policy training; it bounds the representational dimension above, leaving open the choice of how that dimension is partitioned between K and 

dk and how far the retained value of K falls below the upper bound. Phase 2 therefore runs a constrained grid search over K ∈ {⌈ K⋆/2⌉, . . . , K ⋆} at fixed dk = 16 , selecting the value that minimises single-seed tracking RMSE on a held-out payload sweep. The retained value at 

τz = 2 s is K = 7 , i.e. the lower end of the range; at τz = 5 s the retained value is K = 8 , near the middle; at τz = 1 s it is K = 4 , likewise at the lower end. The claim of the paper is therefore not that Phase 1 produces the reinforcement-learning-optimal head count, but that Phase 1 produces a tight upper bound that is compatible with a 26 Table 4. Main comparison; 50 + 10 = 60 training runs. n: seeds per cell; W : window size; K:attention head count; pU : Mann–Whitney one-sided (INCRT-1L < Transformer); pW : Welch two-sided;                                                                                              

> d: Cohen’s pooled-variance effect size. Boldface marks α= 0 .05 .Transformer-tuned is a regime-matched baseline with W= 50 at both regimes, introduced to isolate the effect of window size from the architectural choice.
> τzArchitecture nWParams ∆% (mean ±s.d.) dpUpW
> 1sINCRT-1L 10 20 114 k−51 .34 ±8.11 −1.10 0.013 0.027
> Transformer 10 20 265 k−39 .27 ±13 .29 ———
> 2sINCRT-1L 550 241 k−54 .82 ±7.94 ———Transformer 520 265 k−36 .29 ±9.93 −2.06 0.008 0.012
> Transformer-tuned 550 271 k−35 .73 ±10 .71 −2.02 0.008 0.014
> 5sINCRT-1L 10 20 282 k−32 .19 ±31 .83 ———Transformer 10 20 265 k−29 .30 ±20 .47 −0.11 0.214 0.813
> Transformer-tuned 550 271 k−30 .29 ±15 .86 −0.07 0.257 0.880

much smaller Phase 2 search budget than an unconstrained grid. On the 2-DOF task, a Phase 2 grid that spans K ∈ { 1, . . . , 16 } at a single regime requires sixteen training runs; the Phase 1-constrained grid used here requires between four and eight runs per regime. The retained K is reported alongside K⋆ in every table below, so that the separation between theoretical prediction and empirical selection is explicit. 

## 7.3 Main comparison 

Table 4 reports the per-seed mean and sample standard deviation of ∆% across the seeds for each architecture–regime pair, with the parameter count, the effect size, and the p-value. Sample sizes are n = 10 at τz ∈ { 1, 5} s (five original seeds plus five extension seeds) and n = 5 at 

τz = 2 s. The forest plot of Figure 2 renders the same data with 95% confidence intervals. The experimental study delivers three results of differing strength. At τz = 1 s the sample size of n = 10 is sufficient to reject the null at α = 0 .05 under both tests. INCRT-1L attains ∆% = −51 .34% against the Transformer’s −39 .27% , a gap of 

12 .07 percentage points, with pU = 0 .013 , pW = 0 .027 and d = −1.10 . The effect size is large. INCRT-1L achieves this advantage with 43% of the Transformer’s parameter count. At τz = 2 s, the regime at which the memory horizon is of the same order as the window-time product W ∆t at the retained window W = 50 , INCRT-1L attains ∆% = −54 .82% against 

−36 .29% , a gap of 18 .53 percentage points, with pU = 0 .008 , pW = 0 .012 , d = −2.06 . The effect size is very large; the p-value is below α = 0 .01 under both tests. The statistical evidence is strongest at this regime and rests on n = 5 seeds per cell: the extension to n = 10 was deferred at this regime because the n = 5 result is already conclusive. Parameter count is within 9% of the Transformer baseline. At τz = 5 s the outcome changes qualitatively with the enlarged sample. With n = 10 , the INCRT-1L mean is −32 .19% against the Transformer’s −29 .30% , a gap of only 2.89 percentage 27 −80 −70 −60 −50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0                                        

> Δ% vs. fixed-gain baseline (95% CI)
> Transformer, τz= 1 s ( n= 10 )
> INCRT-1L, τz= 1 s ( n= 10 )
> Transformer, τz= 2 s ( n= 5 )
> Trans.-tuned, τz= 2 s ( n= 5 )
> INCRT-1L, τz= 2 s ( n= 5 )
> Transformer, τz= 5 s ( n= 10 )
> Trans.-tuned, τz= 5 s ( n= 5 )
> INCRT-1L, τz= 5 s ( n= 10 )
> INCRT-1L vs Trans.: d= −1.10 ,pU= 0.013 *
> INCRT-1L vs Trans.-tuned: d= −2.02 ,pU= 0.008 **
> INCRT-1L vs Trans.-tuned: d= −0.07 ,pU= 0.257 n.s.
> Main comparison — multi-seed (E1+E2)

Figure 2. Mean ∆% with 95% confidence interval, per architecture and regime. Sample sizes: n = 10 

at τz ∈ { 1, 5} s, n = 5 at τz = 2 s. Significance at α = 0 .05 is reached at τz ∈ { 1, 2} s; at τz = 5 s the effect size is negligible and the test does not reject. 

points, with pU = 0 .214 , pW = 0 .813 and d = −0.11 . Neither test rejects the null, and the effect size is negligible. The gap between INCRT-1L and Transformer therefore closes at the long memory horizon once the sample is enlarged from n = 5 to n = 10 . The explanation, developed in Section 7.5, is that the additional five seeds reveal a structural failure mode of INCRT-1L at this regime: four of the ten runs exhibit either divergence or payload-invariant collapse, with flat per-payload RMSE near 0.13 –0.17 rad and no discernible improvement over the fixed-gain baseline. The Transformer baseline at the same regime exhibits one such failure out of ten. The failure mode is a local attractor of the reinforcement-learning optimisation that is specific to the long memory horizon and is reached more frequently by INCRT-1L than by the Transformer. The single-layer attention-only architecture, selected in Phase 2 for its simplicity and parameter economy, is not sufficient to ensure escape from this attractor on a fixed training budget. This finding motivates the runtime-adaptive follow-up discussed in Section 8. The empirical picture at the three regimes is therefore as follows. INCRT-1L offers a sta-tistically significant, large-effect advantage at the short and matched regimes, with a parameter economy at the short regime. At the long regime it offers no advantage over the Transformer on a n = 10 sample, and exhibits a training pathology that appears in a significant fraction of runs. The combination is compatible with the rank-based analysis of Section 5: the head-count bound K⋆ is a representational bound on the static architecture, and its prescription is most useful when the reinforcement-learning optimisation can actually exploit the bounded capacity — which, at τz = 5 s, it does not reliably do. 

Is the advantage due to window tuning? A potential confound in the comparison above is that INCRT-1L uses a larger window ( W = 50 ) at τz = 2 s than the Transformer baseline 28 0 0.375 0.75 1.125 1.5                    

> payload (kg)
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> tracking RMSE
> τz= 1 s
> baseline
> Trans. ( W= 20 , n=10)
> INCRT-1L (n=10)
> 00.375 0.75 1.125 1.5
> payload (kg)
> τz= 2 s
> baseline
> Trans. ( W= 20 , n=5)
> INCRT-1L (n=5)
> Trans.-tuned ( W= 50 , n=5)
> 00.375 0.75 1.125 1.5
> payload (kg)
> τz= 5 s
> baseline
> Trans. ( W= 20 , n=10)
> INCRT-1L (n=10)
> Trans.-tuned ( W= 50 , n=5)

Figure 3. Per-payload tracking RMSE, mean ± one standard deviation across all seeds ( n = 10 at 

τz = 1 , 5 s; n = 5 at τz = 2 s). The widened INCRT-1L error band at τz = 5 s reflects the failure-mode runs analysed in Section 7.5. 

(W = 20 ), and the advantage could in principle be attributable to window size rather than to the architectural choice. To isolate the two effects, a regime-tuned Transformer baseline is reported in Table 4 under the label Transformer-tuned : a two-layer Transformer with feed-forward sub-layer and K = 4 heads, identical to the original Transformer baseline except for the window, which is set to W = 50 at both τz = 2 and τz = 5 s. The outcome is unambiguous. At τz = 2 s the Transformer-tuned mean is −35 .73% , statistically indistinguishable from the 

W = 20 baseline at −36 .29% (two-sided Welch p = 0 .93 ); the gap from INCRT-1L shrinks by less than half a percentage point and remains significant at Cohen’s d = −2.02 , pU = 0 .008 ,

pW = 0 .014 . At τz = 5 s the same conclusion holds: the Transformer-tuned mean is −30 .29% 

against the W = 20 baseline’s −29 .30% , again statistically indistinguishable ( p = 0 .92 ). The window size therefore does not explain the advantage of INCRT-1L at the matched regime: the advantage rests on the architectural structure, namely the single-layer attention block with head count K = 7 prescribed by the Phase 1 analysis and no feed-forward sub-layer. 

## 7.4 Payload profile and ablation 

Figure 3 reports tracking RMSE as a function of payload at each regime. At τz ∈ { 1, 2} s the qualitative shape is consistent with Table 4: RMSE grows monotonically with payload for both architectures, the INCRT-1L curve lies systematically below the Transformer curve, and the fixed-gain baseline (dashed) sits above both. At τz = 5 s the INCRT-1L curve has visibly wider error bars than at the other two regimes: the four runs identified in Section 7.5 as divergent or collapsed contribute the upper tail of the confidence band, and the INCRT-1L mean curve consequently approaches the Transformer curve across the full payload range. The ablation over depth, feed-forward capacity, and window size is reported in Table 5 and rendered in Figure 4. The ablation is single-seed, run with seed 42 . Three regularities support the choices made in the multi-seed study. 

Depth without a non-linearity diverges. At τz = 2 s, the L = 2 attention-only configuration with W = 20 diverges during training, yielding ∆% = +37 .9 (37 .9% worse than the fixed-gain 29 Table 5. Single-seed (L, FFN , W ) ablation at τz ∈ { 2, 5} s, dk = 16 , K = K⋆. Starred rows are the Phase-2 winners of Table 4; daggered rows diverged during training. Missing cells at W = 100 , τ z = 5 swere not recovered after a compute-time-out.                                               

> τz= 2 sτz= 5 s
> LFFN W= 20 W= 50 W= 100 W= 20 W= 50 W= 100 1–−35 .5−62 .3∗−40 .6−61 .9∗−45 .6−39 .92–+37 .9†−57 .6−43 .5−24 .1−29 .0−25 .42FFN −22 .9−51 .5−46 .8−53 .2−19 .2—
> 3–−44 .9+1 .4†+79 .8†−39 .3−49 .3—

baseline). At τz = 2 s and L = 3 the divergence worsens, reaching ∆% = +79 .8 at W = 100 .Adding a feed-forward sub-layer ( L = 2 -FFN) rescues training but still loses between 7 and 14 

percentage points to the single-layer block at both regimes. The pattern is consistent with the rank-compression mechanism analysed in [8]: stacking attention blocks without an intervening non-linearity compresses the number of independent directions available downstream of the attention. 

The optimal window is non-monotone in the memory horizon. At τz = 2 s the best window is W = 50 ; at τz = 5 s it is W = 20 . Proposition 5.12(iii) would guarantee closing the Markov gap only with W ≥ 500 at τz = 5 s. The retained configuration therefore operates in the partial-coverage regime, and the long-horizon result in Table 4 should be read accordingly. The most plausible explanation for this inversion is that at long horizons the quadratic cost of atten-tion, against a fixed 50 000 -step training budget, tips the balance towards shorter windows with sharper positional signal; the phenomenon is not predicted by the window condition of Sec-tion 5 and represents a genuine gap between the sufficient condition and the observed empirical optimum. 

The regime-tuned Transformer baseline. The comparison in Table 4 is supplemented by a Transformer-tuned baseline with W = 50 at both τz = 2 and τz = 5 s, which matches the window of the INCRT-1L winner at the matched regime. As reported above, the tuned baseline is statistically indistinguishable from the W = 20 baseline at either regime ( p ≥ 0.92 under Welch), and INCRT-1L retains its large advantage over it at τz = 2 s ( d = −2.02 , pU =0.008 ). The window size therefore does not explain the gap; the interpretation of the INCRT-1L advantage at the matched regime as architectural (single-layer, attention-only, K = 7 heads) is consistent with the data. 

## 7.5 Failure-mode analysis at long memory horizon 

The vanishing gap between INCRT-1L and Transformer at τz = 5 s is, with an n = 10 sample, the central empirical finding of the study and deserves a dedicated analysis. The raw per-seed 

∆% distribution at τz = 5 s is reproduced in Figure 5. Of the ten INCRT-1L runs at this regime, five track well ( ∆% ∈ [−64 .7, −51 .4] ), two track weakly ( ∆% ∈ [−35 .7, −34 .3] ), two diverge 30 W=20 W=50 W=100            

> window size
> 1L
> 2L-noFFN
> 2L-FFN
> 3L-noFFN
> architecture
> -35.5 -62.3 -40.6
> +37.9 †-57.6 -43.5
> -22.9 -51.5 -46.8
> -44.9 +1.4 †+79.8 †

τz = 2 s          

> W=20 W=50 W=100
> window size
> -61.9 -45.6 -39.9
> -24.1 -29.0 -25.4
> -53.2 -19.2 —
> -39.3 -49.3 —

τz = 5 s    

> −60
> −40
> −20
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> Δ%  (negative = better than baseline)
> Bold border: multi-seed winner. †diverged during training. —: not run.

Figure 4. (L, FFN , W ) ablation heatmap. Green: better than baseline; red: worse. Solid border: Phase-2 winner. Daggered cells diverged during training. Trans.                             

> τz= 1 s, n= 10
> INCRT-1L
> τz= 1 s, n= 10
> Trans.
> τz= 2 s, n= 5
> Trans.-tuned
> τz= 2 s, n= 5
> INCRT-1L
> τz= 2 s, n= 5
> Trans.
> τz= 5 s, n= 10
> Trans.-tuned
> τz= 5 s, n= 5
> INCRT-1L
> τz= 5 s, n= 10
> −60
> −40
> −20
> 0
> 20
> 40
> Δ%  vs. baseline
> Per-seed Δ% distribution (60 runs total)
> INCRT-1L
> Transformer ( W= 20 )
> Transformer-tuned ( W= 50 )
> diverged
> collapsed

Figure 5. Per-seed ∆% distribution. Crosses: runs that diverged during training; diamonds: run that collapsed to a payload-invariant policy; circles: trained normally. The INCRT-1L box at τz = 5 scontains four markers of failure-mode type. 

during training ( ∆% = +15 .0 and +23 .3), and one collapses to a payload-invariant policy (∆% = −6.5). The diverged and collapsed runs — four of the ten — are the failure mode runs .The Transformer baseline at the same regime has one diverged run and no collapsed runs; the regime-tuned Transformer ( W = 50 ) has no diverged and no collapsed runs out of five. The difference in failure rate, 4/10 for INCRT-1L against 1/10 and 0/5 for the two Transformer variants, is the structural asymmetry that explains the closure of the gap at this regime and attributes the pathology specifically to the single-layer attention-only block. The failure mode admits a clean empirical signature. In a trained run, tracking RMSE grows monotonically with payload, by typically 0.04 –0.10 rad over the payload sweep. In a failure-mode run, RMSE is nearly flat in payload: the four INCRT-1L pathological runs have RMSE range across payloads of 0.010 , 0.030 , 0.025 and 0.048 rad respectively, against an average range of 0.045 rad for the six healthy runs at the same regime. The flat profile is the fingerprint of a policy that is approximately invariant to the payload context: the attention heads responsible for modulating the controller gains in response to recent motion have been 31 effectively bypassed, and the policy reduces to a function of the trajectory reference alone. Under the payload distribution used at training, the optimal payload-invariant policy has an expected tracking error close to the fixed-gain baseline, so the collapsed runs yield ∆% ≈ 0

(seed 45 : −6.5% ; seed 47 : +15 .0% ; seed 49 : +23 .3% ). A mechanism consistent with this signature is as follows. The INCRT-1L meta-controller is attention-only; the payload-dependent information must pass through the attention heads to reach the controller gains. If during early training the gradient norms of the payload-sensitive attention heads fall below the noise floor of the reinforcement-learning updates, those heads cease to receive informative gradient signal and their values freeze at near-initial. The output of the block becomes insensitive to the payload component of the history, the SAC reward plateaus at the payload-invariant baseline, and the run stabilises. The same mechanism does not appear at τz ∈ { 1, 2} s because the memory structure there is shallower: the payload-sensitive information is carried by a smaller number of temporal correlations and is correspondingly harder to silence by vanishing gradient alone. The Transformer baseline exhibits the same failure mode at a lower rate. Its two-layer architecture with feed-forward sub-layers admits alternative pathways for payload-dependent information: even if the attention at the first layer collapses, the feed-forward and the second attention layer can partially recover the signal. The single-layer attention-only INCRT-1L block has no such redundancy. This observation does not imply that depth with FFN is superior in general — the ablation of Section 7.4 shows that depth without FFN is catastrophic and that even depth with FFN underperforms single-layer attention-only at τz = 2 s — but it does imply that the single-layer architecture carries a specific failure risk at long memory horizons that is absent in the deeper baseline. 

Implications for the static Phase-1/Phase-2 pipeline. The failure-mode analysis locates the limitation of the present approach at the interface between Phase 1 and Phase 2: Phase 1 pre-scribes a head count K⋆ sufficient to represent the memory, but the static Phase 2 architecture that uses K⋆ does not guarantee that the reinforcement-learning optimisation will actually ex-ploit all K heads. At long memory horizons, the chance that a subset of the heads becomes silent during training is non-negligible and depends on the initial seed. A runtime-adaptive formula-tion in which the capacity of the attention block is monitored during training, and under-utilised heads are pruned and replaced, removes the failure mode by construction: the surrogate that jus-tifies Phase 1 is then re-run at intervals during Phase 2, with feedback from the reinforcement-learning gradient signal informing the growth and pruning decisions. The follow-up outlined in Section 8 develops this formulation. 

## 7.6 Other limitations 

Three further limitations of the present study are reported explicitly. 32 Statistical power at the matched regime. The τz = 2 s result is based on n = 5 seeds. The effect size is very large and both tests reject the null well below α = 0 .01 , so the conclusion is not power-limited. A replication at n = 10 is nonetheless planned, together with extensions to intermediate regimes τz ∈ { 1.5, 3} s. The total training cost of the sixty runs reported in Table 4 (thirty original runs, twenty seed-extension runs, ten regime-tuned runs) is approximately 25 

GPU-hours on a single NVIDIA A100. 

Scope of the baseline suite. Two Transformer variants are considered in Table 4: the original 

W = 20 configuration and the regime-tuned W = 50 configuration. Additional baselines — a non-attention history model (e.g. a convolutional history encoder) and a parameter-matched shallow attention block with a head count independent of the Phase-1 analysis — would further disentangle the contribution of individual architectural choices. Such extensions are left to future work. 

Scope of the friction model. Stribeck friction with an exponentially decaying internal state is a canonical surrogate for a broader class of unobservable memory phenomena, but the ex-perimental evaluation is confined to this model. Generalisation to soft-contact hysteresis, joint elasticity, or damper dynamics is an open empirical question. 

# 8 Discussion 

The experimental study of Section 7 establishes two statistically significant regimes of advan-tage and one regime of failure. At the short memory horizon τz = 1 s the single-layer INCRT-1L meta-controller outperforms the two-layer Transformer baseline by 12 .1 percentage points of 

∆% , with pU = 0 .013 and Cohen’s d = −1.10 on n = 10 seeds, and does so with 43% of the baseline’s parameter count. At the matched memory horizon τz = 2 s the advantage is larger: 18 .5 percentage points, pU = 0 .008 , d = −2.06 on n = 5 seeds, with parameter count within 9% of the baseline. Both results hold under both the non-parametric and the parametric test at α = 0 .05 , with large effect sizes. At the long memory horizon τz = 5 s the advantage vanishes on n = 10 : the gap shrinks to 2.9 percentage points and the effect size is negligible (d = −0.11 ). The driver of this reversal is a failure-mode cluster specific to INCRT-1L at long horizons, identified in Section 7.5: four of the ten runs diverge or collapse to a payload-invariant policy, against one of the ten Transformer runs at the same regime. The two significant results are obtained at the regimes at which the theoretical analysis of Section 5 is most nearly operational. At the short horizon the window-time product W ∆t =0.2 s is of the same order as the memory horizon τz = 1 s, and the sufficient condition of Proposition 5.12(iii) is satisfied with slack. At the matched horizon the condition is satisfied equalitywise at the retained W = 50 , ∆t = 10 ms, giving W ∆t = 0 .5 s against τz = 2 s; the window is formally insufficient by a factor of four but the ablation shows it as empirically optimal. The head-count bound K⋆ from Phase 1 peaks at the matched horizon ( K⋆ = 14 ) and is lower at the shorter and longer horizons ( K⋆ = 8 and 11 ); the Phase-2 retained values, at 33 the lower end of the [K⋆/2, K ⋆] interval, use between 4 and 8 heads. The two stages of the pipeline are compatible: Phase 1 bounds the capacity, Phase 2 retains a specific value within the bound, and the two results of the paper are obtained at regimes where this composition operates cleanly. The ablation of Section 7.4 yields two observations that are of broader interest than the head-count question. The first is that attention depth without a feed-forward non-linearity is consistently harmful in this task, with multiple configurations diverging during training and the remainder losing significant tracking performance relative to the single-layer attention-only block. The pattern is compatible with the rank-compression mechanism analysed in [8]: stack-ing attention blocks without a rank-recovery non-linearity reduces the number of independent directions available downstream of the attention. For the present task, where the attention car-ries temporal information that must be preserved, the degradation is severe enough to drive training unstable. The finding is qualitative and its generalisation beyond the Stribeck-friction setting of this paper is an open question. The second observation concerns the window size. The optimal window is non-monotone in the memory horizon: W = 50 at τz = 2 s, but W = 20 at both τz = 1 s and τz = 5 s. The inversion at long horizons is not predicted by the theory, which requires W proportional to τz

to close the Markov gap. A plausible mechanism is that the quadratic cost of attention, against a fixed training budget, tips the balance towards shorter windows with sharper positional signal when the memory horizon is long. The observation is practically useful: it suggests that oper-ating in the partial-coverage regime is not always suboptimal, provided that the policy is given enough training budget to resolve the coarser temporal structure. A quantitative characterisation of this trade-off is outside the scope of the present paper. The failure-mode cluster observed at τz = 5 s is the most informative single outcome of the study. As detailed in Section 7.5, four of the ten INCRT-1L runs at this regime either diverge or collapse to a payload-invariant policy, against one of the ten Transformer runs. The empirical signature of the collapsed runs is a flat per-payload RMSE profile, with total range across pay-loads an order of magnitude smaller than the range observed in healthy runs. The mechanism proposed there is that the policy settles in a region of the parameter space in which the attention heads responsible for payload modulation have negligible gradient, so that the policy reduces to a function of the trajectory reference alone. Because INCRT-1L is attention-only, the payload signal has no alternative pathway through the block, and the collapse is terminal; the two-layer-with-FFN Transformer retains alternative pathways through the feed-forward sublayer and its second attention layer, and collapses at a lower rate. The phenomenon is a local attractor of the reinforcement-learning optimisation that is specific to the long memory horizon: at the shorter and matched horizons, the memory structure is shallower and the payload-sensitive information is harder to silence by vanishing gradient alone. A direct test of this mechanism is available in principle through inspection of the attention-head gradient norms on a failed run; a more substantive remedy belongs to the follow-up in which the attention capacity is adjusted during 34 training rather than fixed by Phase 1. 

Follow-up agenda. The natural extension of the present work moves the rank-tracking dy-namics of [7] inside the reinforcement-learning loop, replacing the fixed Phase-2 architecture with a meta-controller whose head count evolves during closed-loop operation. Three motiva-tions support this extension. First, the memory horizon τz may itself be non-stationary in realis-tic deployment, because friction characteristics change with wear, temperature, or lubrication; the optimal head count is then time-varying and a fixed Phase-1 value is a biased point estimate. Second, the failure mode of Section 7.5 is consistent with a subset of heads becoming effec-tively silent during training; a runtime growth signal that detects under-utilisation and a pruning signal that detects redundancy provide a structural feedback loop absent from the present static formulation. Third, a runtime-adaptive scheme allocates capacity only where the growth signal justifies it, with consequent savings on both training time and deployment footprint. The follow-up requires a new experimental design in which τz is made non-stationary within episodes, because the static-τz experiments of the present paper are not informative about the runtime-adaptive setting. It also requires resolution of the actor-critic non-stationarity issue that motivated the search-then-retrain separation of Section 6.3: running the rank-tracking dynam-ics concurrently with reinforcement-learning training is known to produce training instabilities in actor-critic reinforcement learning, because the critic must track a non-stationary policy-parameter dimension. Whether the structured rank-tracking of [7], with its bidirectional gate, admits a co-training schedule that preserves critic stability is the central open question of the follow-up. 

# 9 Conclusions 

Three conclusions are warranted by the study. First, for control tasks in which the friction dynamics carry an internal state that is observable only through its effect on the past motion, the architectural question "how many attention heads are needed" admits an answer that is separable from the question "how should the policy be trained". The rank of a task-specific covariance operator, estimated offline and entirely separately from the reinforcement-learning objective, provides an upper bound on the head count that compresses the Phase-2 search by a factor of two to four relative to an unconstrained grid. The advantage of this separation is organisational as much as theoretical: Phase 1 runs on a CPU in minutes and its output is a small integer, which divides a month of reinforcement-learning training into a week. Second, the architectural choices that result are not parameter-efficient in an unconditional sense. At the shortest memory horizon the head-count analysis produces a meta-controller with less than half the parameters of the Transformer baseline; at the longest, the head count it pre-scribes exceeds that baseline. The parameter economy of the proposed method is a consequence of the memory structure of the task, not of the method itself, and it inverts as the memory hori-35 zon grows. A practical consequence is that the head-count analysis should be run on the target horizon, not on a proxy, because its output is regime-specific. Third, the study exposes a structural failure mode of the static Phase-1/Phase-2 separation that is specific to the long memory horizon: four of ten training runs at that horizon settle in a local attractor of the reinforcement-learning optimisation in which the attention is effectively silenced, and the policy reduces to a payload-invariant map. The failure rate is asymmetric between architectures — 4/10 for single-layer attention-only against 1/10 for the two-layer Transformer with feed-forward — and identifies the single-layer architecture as the specific element of the proposed pipeline that is most vulnerable at long horizons. The finding has two implications. For the present static architecture, it argues for a larger sample size at the long horizon, better controlled for the initial conditions, and for an alternative parameter ini-tialisation that biases against the attention-silencing attractor. For future work, it argues for a formulation in which the attention capacity is adjusted online: a head whose gradient norm falls below threshold is pruned and replaced, which would prevent the collapse observed here. The runtime formulation is also independently motivated by the non-stationarity of τz in realistic deployment, where friction characteristics vary with wear, temperature, and lubrication. The companion follow-up under preparation pursues this runtime formulation on a task in which τz varies within episodes. The central open problem is the interaction between the rank-tracking dynamics and the actor-critic optimisation: whether a co-training schedule exists that preserves critic stability while the attention head count evolves. A positive answer would close the loop between the two halves of the present paper; a negative answer would identify the static Phase-1/Phase-2 separation as a structural limitation rather than a design choice. 

# Acknowledgements 

The authors thank the MIRPALab and LTI laboratory members for discussions on the interplay between adaptive control, safe reinforcement learning, and attention-based meta-control. 

# Conflict of Interest Statement 

The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

# Data Availability Statement 

The per-seed JSON result files and the aggregation and statistical-analysis scripts used to pro-duce Table 4 and Figure 3 will be made available in a public repository upon acceptance of the manuscript. 36 A Proofs of Section 5 results 

This appendix collects the proofs and derivations referenced in Section 5. Sections A.1 and A.2 treat the Markovian optimality gap and the σ2 

> z

-scaling law respectively. Section A.3 verifies the three structural properties of the temporal residual operator required by [7, Thm. 7]. Section A.4 establishes the non-monotonicity of K⋆(τz ).

## A.1 Proof of Proposition 5.12 

We prove the three parts in turn. 

A.1.1 Part (i): history-dependence of the optimal parameter 

Under Definition 5.10, the state of the controlled system is (q, ˙q, z ). The optimal feedback is the minimiser of the expected cost-to-go conditional on the full state: 

θ⋆

> ctrl

(t) = arg min 

> θ∈P

E

Z Tt

ℓ(q(s), q d(s)) ds q(t), ˙q(t), z (t), θ 



. (32) By the strong convexity of ℓ in θ, the minimiser is unique and differentiable in the conditioning random variables. In particular, θ⋆

> ctrl

(t) depends on z(t). By Definition 5.10(ii), z(t) is not 

σ(q(t), ˙q(t)) -measurable: equivalently, there exist sample paths (q1, ˙q1) and (q2, ˙q2) that agree at time t up to measure-zero events but produce different values of z(t), forced by different histories. Hence θ⋆

> ctrl

(t) is not a function of (q(t), ˙q(t)) alone, completing part (i). 

A.1.2 Part (ii): lower bound for Markovian policies 

Let GMk (q, ˙q) be any fixed measurable function of the instantaneous state. Its expected cost decomposes as 

E[ℓ(GMk )] = Eℓ GMk (q, ˙q), z  (33) 

= Eq, ˙q

Ez|q, ˙q

ℓ(GMk (q, ˙q), z ) . (34) Fix (q, ˙q). Let ¯z = E[z | q, ˙q] and let θ⋆(q, ˙q, z ) = arg min θ ℓ(θ, z ) be the pointwise optimiser in 

θ for every value of z. By strong convexity of ℓ with modulus μ > 0,

ℓ(θ, z ) ≥ ℓ θ⋆(q, ˙q, z ), z  + μ

2 θ − θ⋆(q, ˙q, z ) 2 (35) for all θ ∈ P and all z. Taking θ = GMk (q, ˙q) (which does not depend on z) and taking conditional expectation over z|(q, ˙q):

Ez

ℓ(GMk , z ) ≥ Ez[ℓ(θ⋆, z )] + μ

2 Ez

h

GMk − θ⋆(q, ˙q, z ) 2i

. (36) 37 The rightmost term is a conditional second moment. Using Ez ∥θ⋆ − ¯θ⋆∥2 ≤ Ez ∥GMk − θ⋆∥2

where ¯θ⋆ := Ez [θ⋆(q, ˙q, z )] is the best Markovian response, we obtain 

Ez

h

GMk − θ⋆(q, ˙q, z ) 2i

≥ Var  θ⋆(q, ˙q, z ) q, ˙q. (37) By the implicit function theorem applied to the first-order optimality condition of θ⋆, there exists 

κ > 0 such that 

Var  θ⋆(q, ˙q, z ) q, ˙q ≥ κ2 Var( z | q, ˙q). (38) The constant κ measures the sensitivity of the pointwise optimiser to z and is strictly positive whenever z enters the cost through a non-degenerate direction — which is the case for friction-dependent meta-control by construction. Combining (36)–(38) and taking outer expectation over (q, ˙q):

E[ℓ(GMk )] − ℓ⋆ ≥ μκ 2

2 · E[Var( z|q, ˙q)] = c1σ2 

> z

, (39) with c1 = μκ 2/2. This is (23). 

A.1.3 Part (iii): windowed meta-controller achieves o(σ2 

> z

)

Let HW (t) := {q(s), ˙q(s) : s ∈ [t − W, t ]} be the history window of length W . We claim that, when W ≥ Hz , there exists a measurable map Ψ : HW → Rnz with the property 

E[ (Ψ( HW (t)) − z(t)) 2 ] → 0 as W → ∞ . Fixing W sufficiently large, Ψ recovers z(t) up to an error of order e−W/H z , and this error enters the meta-controller excess cost with the same multiplicative constant as in part (ii). Hence, for a windowed meta-controller GW which com-poses Ψ with θ⋆, the excess cost is bounded by c1 e−2W/H z σ2 

> z

= o(σ2 

> z

) as W → ∞ .The existence of Ψ follows from the linear (or linearisable) dynamics ˙z = ζ(q, ˙q, z ): the variation-of-constants formula expresses z(t) as a convolution integral of ˙q over the past, and truncating the integral at depth W introduces an exponentially-decaying error. A universal approximator (e.g., a causal Transformer with attention over the window) can realise Ψ to any desired approximation error, by Cybenko-type arguments adapted to sequence models. This completes part (iii). 

## A.2 Derivation of the σ2 

> z

## scaling law (Remark 5.13) 

We derive the closed-form expression for σ2 

> z

under the assumptions that z follows the linear dynamics ˙z = −z/τ z + λz ˙q and that ˙q is a zero-mean second-order stationary process with autocorrelation ρ ˙q(τ ) and variance σ2˙q = E[ ˙ q2].The variation-of-constants formula gives 

z(t) = λz

Z t

> −∞

e−(t−s)/τ z ˙q(s) ds. (40) 38 Stationarity in the steady regime implies 

Var( z(t)) = λ2

> z

Z t

> −∞

Z t

> −∞

e−(t−s1)/τ z e−(t−s2)/τ z E[ ˙ q(s1) ˙ q(s2)] ds 1 ds 2. (41) Substituting E[ ˙ q(s1) ˙ q(s2)] = σ2˙q ρ ˙q(s1 − s2) and changing variables u = t − s1, v = t − s2:

Var( z(t)) = λ2 

> z

σ2˙q

Z ∞

> 0

Z ∞

> 0

e−u/τ z e−v/τ z ρ ˙q(u − v) du dv. (42) The conditional variance σ2 

> z

= E[Var( z|q, ˙q)] differs from Var( z) only by the information that (q, ˙q) carry about z at the present time. For the linear-Gaussian case, the ratio σ2 

> z

/Var( z)

is (1 − ρ2˙qz (0)) where ρ ˙qz (0) is the normalised covariance between ˙q(t) and z(t). A direct computation from (40) gives 

Cov( ˙ q(t), z (t)) = λz

Z ∞

> 0

e−u/τ z σ2˙q ρ ˙q(u)du, (43) and combining with (42) after simplification yields 

σ2 

> z

(τz ) = λ2 

> z

σ2˙q · τz

2 ·  1 − ρ ˙q(τz ), (44) where ρ ˙q(τz ) is the autocorrelation of ˙q at the lag equal to the memory horizon. Two limits are of interest: (i) As τz → 0, ρ ˙q(τz ) → 1 and the factor τz (1 − ρ ˙q(τz )) vanishes (Taylor expansion of ρ), so 

σ2 

> z

→ 0: a memoryless policy becomes optimal. (ii) As τz → ∞ , ρ ˙q(τz ) → 0 and the factor converges to τz /2. The conditional variance grows linearly in τz , so the Markovian gap diverges: no memoryless policy can achieve bounded excess cost. For the task considered in Section 7, ˙q is a sinusoid with the reference-trajectory period 2π:in this case ρ ˙q oscillates and (44) gives a predicted scaling in τz consistent with the multi-seed comparison reported in Table 4. 

## A.3 Structural properties of Atemp res (Proposition 5.15) 

We verify in turn the three properties of Atemp res required by [7, Thm. 7]: symmetry, rank-one deflation, and incoherence of the deflated directions. 

Symmetry. By its definition (25) as an expected outer product, Atemp res is symmetric positive semi-definite: Atemp res = Atemp ⊤ 

> res

and λi(Atemp res ) ≥ 0 for all i.39 Rank-one deflation. Differentiating the variation-of-constants formula (40) with respect to 

˙q(t − ℓ) (the history entry at lag ℓ ∈ [0 , W ]): 

∂z (t)

∂ ˙q(t − ℓ) = λz e−ℓ/τ z . (45) This is a scalar multiplier depending only on ℓ and τz , not on ˙q itself. Under the linear-Stribeck model, the history gradient ∇hist z(t) ∈ RW is therefore a fixed exponential-decay vector v(τz ) := λz

 e−ℓ1/τ z , . . . , e −ℓW /τ z

 up to sampling noise. Hence 

Atemp res = v(τz ) v(τz )⊤ + Σ ϵ, (46) where Σϵ captures second-order corrections (nonlinearity of Stribeck, measurement noise, non-stationarity of ˙q). The leading term is rank-one, satisfying the deflation hypothesis. 

Incoherence of the deflated directions. After deflating the rank-one principal direction v(τz ),the residual Σϵ must have its eigenvectors incoherent with the canonical basis (i.e., the temporal lag basis) to satisfy the compressed-sensing hypothesis. This follows from two facts: (i) The nonlinear corrections to (45) (the Stribeck envelope Fs depends non-linearly on ˙q) produce gra-dient entries that are smoothly distributed across lags, with no concentration on any single lag. (ii) Stationarity of ˙q and the smoothness of its autocorrelation imply the cross-lag covariances of ∇hist z are bounded below away from alignment with any lag direction. Both facts give inco-herence with constant μc < 1/√W in the restricted-isometry sense, which is sufficient for the compressed-sensing bound of [7, Thm. 7]. The three properties imply that [7, Thm. 7] applies to Atemp res , yielding (26). 

## A.4 Non-monotonicity of K⋆(τz) (Corollary 5.16) 

We show that the effective rank reff (Atemp res (τz )) is a non-monotonic function of τz , with a peak in the window-to-horizon matched regime. The analysis proceeds through the explicit form (46). 

Effective-rank formula. For a symmetric positive semi-definite matrix M with eigenvalues 

λ1 ≥ · · · ≥ λW ≥ 0, the effective rank (stable rank) is 

reff (M ) = (P 

> i

λi)2

P 

> i

λ2

> i

= tr( M )2

∥M ∥2

> F

. (47) 

Spectrum of Atemp res . From (46), tr( Atemp res ) = ∥v(τz )∥2 + tr(Σ ϵ) and the leading eigenvalue is λ1 ≈ ∥ v(τz )∥2 when Σϵ is small. Writing the exponential-decay vector v(τz ) explicitly with 

ℓk = k∆t:

∥v(τz )∥2 = λ2

> zW

X

> k=1

e−2k∆t/τ z = λ2 

> z

· e−2∆ t/τ z (1 − e−2W ∆t/τ z )1 − e−2∆ t/τ z . (48) 40 This quantity interpolates between two regimes: 

τz ≪ W ∆t : ∥v(τz )∥2 ∼ λ2 

> z

· τz /(2∆ t), (49) 

τz ≫ W ∆t : ∥v(τz )∥2 ∼ λ2 

> z

· W. (50) 

Qualitative non-monotonicity. Two effects compete as τz grows: (i) More of the memory horizon fits inside the window, enriching the temporal structure captured by Atemp res . This increases the number of significant eigenvalues. (ii) The leading eigenvalue λ1 ∝ ∥ v(τz )∥2 saturates at λ2 

> z

W , so the spectrum becomes domi-nated by the rank-one leading direction. This reduces reff back towards 1.The first effect dominates when τz ≲ W ∆t and the second when τz ≳ W ∆t, placing the peak of 

reff in the neighbourhood of τ ⋆z ∼ W ∆t. The exact location depends on the non-linear Stribeck corrections in Σϵ, which shift τ ⋆z into the interval [W ∆t/ 10 , W ∆t]. For the experimental setting of Section 7 ( W = 20 , ∆t = 0 .01 , giving W ∆t = 0 .2 s), the peak of the empirical K⋆(τz )

falls within this interval scaled by the nonlinearity factor; the observed maximum at τz = 2 s is consistent with the scaling given by the Stribeck-envelope’s approximate saturation at 10 times the linear memory horizon. 

Remark A.1 (Empirical versus theoretical peak) . The scaling of the peak of reff with τz is qual-itative: the location factor depends on the specific form of ζ(q, ˙q, z ), the sampling rate ∆t,and the excitation spectrum of ˙q. The numerical values of reff reported in Table 2 confirm the non-monotonic structure with the peak at the matched regime τz = 2 s. 

# B Experimental details 

This appendix documents the protocol items not fully specified in Section 7. 

## B.1 Simulator and task 

The 2-DOF manipulator dynamics follow the Euler–Lagrange model of Section 3 with the Stribeck friction parametrisation of equations (3)–(4). Integration is performed with an ex-plicit Runge–Kutta step at ∆t = 10 ms; the control period coincides with the integration step. Each episode has fixed horizon T = 5 s, corresponding to H = 500 control steps, after which the episode terminates. Payload p ∈ [0 , 1.5] kg is sampled uniformly at reset and modifies the effective mass matrix M (q, p ) multiplicatively. 41 B.2 Baseline controller 

The fixed-gain reference is a computed-torque law with Kd = 30 (diagonal, both joints) and 

Λ = 5 (sliding-surface coefficient), without feed-forward friction compensation. The baseline RMSE at each memory horizon, averaged over the five payload levels and computed on a fresh evaluation set of 20 rollouts per level, is RMSE base (τz = 1) = 0 .1317 , RMSE base (τz = 2) = 0 .1317 , RMSE base (τz = 5) = 0 .1311 .

These values are the denominators of the ∆% metric reported throughout Section 7. 

## B.3 Meta-controller training 

Training uses SAC [12] as implemented in stable-baselines3 v2.x, with the shielded Lagrangian formulation of Section 4.4. Each training run is allocated 50 000 environment steps. Non-architectural hyperparameters are held constant across all architectures and regimes: learn-ing rate 3 · 10 −4, replay buffer size 10 5, batch size 256 , entropy coefficient learned with the stan-dard auto-tuning schedule, target smoothing τ = 0 .005 , discount γ = 0 .99 . The Lagrangian multiplier β is updated at every gradient step with step size 10 −3.

## B.4 Evaluation 

Evaluation at convergence is performed on a grid of five payload levels p ∈ { 0, 0.375 , 0.75 ,

1.125 , 1.5} kg. For each payload, 20 rollouts are generated with fresh initial conditions sampled from the reset distribution, and the per-rollout RMSE is averaged. The per-payload standard deviations shown in Figure 3 are the between-rollout standard deviations within a seed. The between-seed standard deviations reported in Table 4 are computed over the per-seed means of 

∆% .

## B.5 Seeds and training budget 

The main comparison uses seeds {42 , . . . , 46 } at all three regimes and additionally {47 , . . . , 51 }

at τz ∈ { 1, 5} s, for a total of fifty training runs. No seed was excluded from any reported statistic. Total wall-clock training time across the fifty runs was approximately 21 GPU-hours, distributed between a Colab A100 and a Kaggle T4/A100-class instance, with per-run duration ranging from 20 to 32 minutes depending on architecture and window size. 

## B.6 Reproducibility 

Per-seed result files are released as supplementary material. Each file contains, for the cor-responding run, the architecture name, the parameter count, the per-payload RMSE with its 42 between-rollout standard deviation, the baseline RMSE, and the final value of ∆% . The file-name encodes the architecture, the value of τz , and the seed. The aggregation script that pro-duces Table 4 and Figures 3–5 from these files is released alongside. 

# References 

[1] Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimiza-tion. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,volume 70, pages 22–31, 2017. [2] Eitan Altman. Constrained Markov Decision Processes . Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 1999. [3] Aaron D. Ames, Samuel Coogan, Magnus Egerstedt, Gennaro Notomista, Koushil Sreenath, and Paulo Tabuada. Control barrier functions: Theory and applications. In 

18th European Control Conference (ECC) , pages 3420–3431, 2019. [4] Brian Armstrong-Hélouvry, Pierre Dupont, and Carlos Canudas de Wit. A survey of mod-els, analysis tools and compensation methods for the control of machines with friction. 

Automatica , 30(7):1083–1138, 1994. [5] C. Canudas de Wit, H. Olsson, K. J. Åström, and P. Lischinsky. A new model for control of systems with friction. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 40(3):419–425, 1995. [6] Yinlam Chow, Ofir Nachum, Edgar Duenez-Guzman, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. A Lyapunov-based approach to safe reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 31, pages 8103–8112, 2018. [7] Giansalvo Cirrincione. INCRT: An incremental transformer that determines its own archi-tecture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.10703, 2026. [8] Giansalvo Cirrincione. Rank, channel destruction, and symmetry breaking in transformer architectures. Manuscript submitted to IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learn-ing Systems, 2026. [9] Giansalvo Cirrincione and Adriano Fagiolini. Learned Lyapunov certificates for safe resid-ual reinforcement learning on Euler–Lagrange systems. Manuscript submitted to the In-ternational Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control, 2026. [10] Jacob Cohen. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 2nd edition, 1988. [11] Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture search: A survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 20(55):1–21, 2019. 43 [12] Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Pro-ceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pages 1861– 1870, 2018. [13] Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. DARTS: Differentiable architecture search. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2019. [14] Henry B. Mann and Donald R. Whitney. On a test of whether one of two random variables is stochastically larger than the other. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 18(1):50–60, 1947. [15] Yingjie Miao, Xingyou Song, John D. Co-Reyes, Daiyi Peng, Summer Yue, Eugene Brevdo, and Aleksandra Faust. Differentiable architecture search for reinforcement learn-ing. In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) , volume 188 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 20/1–20/17, 2022. [16] Hieu Pham, Melody Y. Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc V. Le, and Jeff Dean. Efficient neu-ral architecture search via parameter sharing. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pages 4095–4104, 2018. [17] Jean-Jacques E. Slotine and Weiping Li. On the adaptive control of robot manipulators. 

International Journal of Robotics Research , 6(3):49–59, 1987. [18] Mark W. Spong, Seth Hutchinson, and M. Vidyasagar. Robot Modeling and Control .Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2nd edition, 2020. [19] Adam Stooke, Joshua Achiam, and Pieter Abbeel. Responsive safety in reinforcement learning by PID Lagrangian methods. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pages 9133–9143, 2020. [20] Bernard L. Welch. The generalization of “Student’s” problem when several different pop-ulation variances are involved. Biometrika , 34(1–2):28–35, 1947. 44