Title: X2-N: A Transformable Wheel-legged Humanoid Robot with Dual-mode Locomotion and Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.21541v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Apr 2026 00:52:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# X2-N: A Transformable Wheel-legged Humanoid Robot with Dual-mode Locomotion and Manipulation 

Yan Ning 1, Xingzhou Chen 1,∗, Delong Li 2,∗, Hao Zhang 2, Hanfu Gai 2, Tongyuan Li 2,Cheng Zhang 2, Zhihui Peng 2 and Ling Shi 1

Abstract — Wheel-legged robots combine the efficiency of wheeled locomotion with the versatility of legged systems, enabling rapid traversal over both continuous and discrete terrains. However, conventional designs typically employ fixed wheels as feet and limited degrees of freedom (DoFs) at the hips, resulting in reduced stability and mobility during legged locomotion compared to humanoids with flat feet. In addition, most existing platforms lack a full upper body with arms, which limits their ability to perform dexterous manipulation tasks. In this letter, we present X2-N, a high-DoF transformable robot with dual-mode locomotion and manipulation. X2-N can operate in both humanoid and wheel-legged forms and trans-form seamlessly between them through joint reconfiguration. We further propose a reinforcement learning (RL)-based whole-body control framework tailored to this morphology, enabling unified control across hybrid locomotion, transformation, and manipulation. We validate X2-N in a range of challenging loco-motion and manipulation tasks, including dynamic skating-like motion, stair climbing and package delivery. Results demon-strate high locomotion efficiency, strong terrain adaptability, and stable loco-manipulation performance of X2-N, highlighting its potential for real-world deployment. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

In recent years, agile legged robots with high degrees of freedom (DoFs) have achieved significant progress in both research and industry. Among them, humanoid and wheel-legged robots have emerged as two prominent platforms. Humanoid robots [1–3] exhibit impressive capabilities in robust dynamic locomotion and dexterous manipulation through a high-DoF full-body design. Their bipedal structure with flat feet also provides robust standing with minimal ground occupancy, thereby offering benefiting static ma-nipulation. However, during movement, legged locomotion involves frequent impacts to the body and compromises op-erational stability. Moreover, on continuous and flat terrains typical in industrial or civil scenarios, legged locomotion is generally less energy efficient, slower, and less stable compared to wheel-legged systems. Wheel-legged robots integrate wheels into legged systems to improve locomotion efficiency and terrain adaptability [4– 6]. They can achieve stable operation during smooth wheeled      

> 1Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China.
> 2X-lab Department, Agibot Innovation Company, Shanghai, China. Email: {yningaa, xchenfk }@connect.ust.hk, lidelong@agibot.com, ahaobupt@gmail.com, gaihanfu@live.com, in barrel@outlook.com,
> {zhangcheng, pengzhihui }@zhiyuan-robot.com, eesling@ust.hk
> * These authors contributed equally to this work.

Fig. 1: Illustration of X2-N in dual locomotion modes with 4/7-DoF arms, operating on stairs and slopes. locomotion, but suffer from unsteady point-contact con-straints during legged locomotion. Moreover, most systems are designed with limited-DoF legs and only lower bodies, restricting their capabilities in manipulation compared to humanoids. Therefore, it remains challenging for existing robotic platforms to simultaneously achieve efficient, agile locomotion together with stable, dexterous manipulation in a unified form for practical applications. In this paper, we present X2-N, a high-DoF transformable wheel-legged humanoid robot with dual working modes. The robot can operate in either wheel-contact or foot-contact configurations for agile and efficient locomotion, and can interchange between 4-DoF and 7-DoF arms for manipu-lation. X2-N can transition seamlessly between these modes for the most suitable, efficient and stable operation form with a compact size and weight. To control this dual-mode system, we develop a unified control framework tailored to the proposed morphology. It combines a reinforcement learning (RL)-based controller with a model-based whole-body controller for agile hybrid locomotion, reliable mode transformation, and stable loco-manipulation. We validate the effectiveness and robustness of X2-N through simulation and hardware experiments. 

> arXiv:2604.21541v1 [cs.RO] 23 Apr 2026

Our contributions are summarized as follows: (1) We present X2-N, a novel transformable robot platform that integrates features of both wheel-legged and humanoid robots. The system is built upon customized hardware and actuators, enabling both efficient locomotion and dexterous manipulation within a unified design. (2) We propose a new lower-limb joint configuration and mechanism that support both wheel- and foot-contact modes without introducing redundant DoFs for transformation and steering. The legs of X2-N preserve sufficient workspace and maneuverability comparable to conventional humanoid legs. (3) We develop a unified control framework for the pro-posed dual-mode transformable morphology. The framework enables X2-N to switch between different control agents for the most suitable operation form. II. R ELATED WORKS 

A. Humanoid Platforms 

Humanoids provide a generalized robot platform for dy-namic locomotion and dexterous manipulation through high-DoF articulated structures and full-body systems. Recent platforms such as Atlas [1], G1 [2] and Helix [3] demonstrate robust locomotion and complex whole-body behaviors. Modern humanoid designs typically employ 6-DoF legs with flat feet to ensure stability, terrain adaptability, and sufficient workspace. Upper-body systems often adopt 7-DoF arms to achieve full pose controllability while avoiding kinematic singularities. Some designs adopt 4-DoF arms to improve agility and reduce redundant weight when prioritiz-ing dynamic locomotion. However, most humanoids adopt only single-configuration integrated arms for all working sce-narios. In addition, actuator placement is carefully arranged to concentrate mass near the torso and reduce limb inertia, thereby improving dynamic performance [7, 8]. Despite these advances, humanoid robots primarily rely on foot-based locomotion, which leads to reduced efficiency and speed in locomotion compared to wheeled systems. Such locomotion involves discontinuous contacts and frequent impacts with the ground, causing instability and vibration in loco-manipulation. Therefore, the effectiveness and per-formance of humanoids are limited in structured scenarios. 

B. Wheel-Legged Platforms 

Wheel-legged robots use wheels as end-effectors on the legs in place of feet. This design offers great benefits through flexible traversal over uneven terrains using legs, and efficient motion over flat surfaces using wheels. Quadrupedal platforms such as ANYmal [4] and B2W [9] demonstrate strong robustness and mobility in locomotion while bipedal systems such as Tron 1 [5] and DIABLO [6] offer improved compactness and agility indoors and outdoors. Most wheel-legged systems adopt limited-DoF in legs, typically 4 DoFs including the wheel steering. They can per-form smooth operation on continuous terrains with wheeled-locomotion, but have constrained flexibility during legged locomotion. Moreover, compared to humanoids with flat-feet, quadrupeds generally require a bulky operational region 

Fig. 2: Overview of different classic legged robot platforms. while bipeds suffer from unsteady point-contact constraints with ground. These drawbacks heavily influence locomotion agility in confined scenarios and operation stability during static standing conditions. In addition, many wheel-legged platforms are designed with only lower bodies, lacking manipulation capability. Although some may extend functionality through single equipped manipulator or hybrid behaviors [10, 11], the performance for dexterous and complex tasks is very re-stricted. It is notable that the Handle robot [12] from Boston Dynamics demonstrate integrated mobility and manipulation, but it is bulky and not accessible as a research platform. 

C. Control of high-DoF Legged Robot 

For humanoid robots, model-based methods leverage sim-plified dynamic models and optimization to achieve robust locomotion and precise manipulation [13, 14], but are lim-ited by model fidelity and computational complexity. Re-inforcement learning (RL)-based approaches have enhanced dynamic motion skills and loco-manipulation performance with great robustness [15, 16], but are restricted by whole-body control precision. Methods of human motion imitation further improve behavior diversity [17–19] but focus more on versatile locomotion tasks. Wheel-legged robots represent a unique frontier in hy-brid locomotion. Early model-based control strategies [4, 6] are constrained by overly simplified system modeling and limited dynamic robustness. Recent learning-based methods improve locomotion adaptability and achieve hybrid whole-body behaviors [11, 20]. However, most wheel-legged robots lack dexterous manipulation capabilities and the potential applications are still limited by hardware forms. Moreover, current control strategies are typically devel-oped for fixed robot morphologies and single operation modes. It remains mostly unexplored for a unified control framework that merges robust RL-based methods for lo-comotion and precise model-based control for whole-body manipulation, especially for robot platforms with multiple operation modes and transformation. Fig. 3: Illustration of X2-N’s specifications. III. S YSTEM DESIGN 

A. Overview 

X2-N is a fully electric and mid-sized wheel-legged hu-manoid robot with both wheel-legged and foot-legged modes. It weighs approximately 28 kg and stands 1.1 m tall, as shown in Fig. 3. The system consists of a torso, a waist, two arms, and two legs, primarily constructed from aluminum. The standard configuration of X2-N has 21 DoFs in foot-legged mode and 17 DoFs in wheel-legged mode to accommodate the distinct requirements of the two loco-motion modes. Through a unified mechanical design, the system supports both transformation and locomotion without introducing additional actuators, thereby avoiding increased system weight and complexity. The upper body adopts a modular design with interchangeable manipulators, support-ing both lightweight operation and dexterous manipulation. This design enables a unified platform that integrates efficient locomotion with dexterous manipulation. Detailed designs of the lower limbs, upper body, and actuation system are presented in the following sections. 

B. A Two-mode Transformable Leg Design 

Designing a unified robot platform that integrates hu-manoid and wheel-legged configurations is challenging due to their mismatched kinematic structures, particularly in degrees of freedom (DoFs) and contact constraints. More-over, enabling transformation between two modes typically requires additional dedicated actuation. To address this issue, we propose a transformable lower-limb architecture based on a joint reuse principle, to support both locomotion and transformation within a unified design. In foot-legged mode, the lower body consists of 13 DoFs, including a 1-DoF waist yaw joint and two 6-DoF legs. Each leg follows a conventional humanoid topology with a 3-DoF hip (pitch, roll, yaw), a 1-DoF knee (pitch), and a 2-DoF ankle (pitch, roll). Departing from standard designs, we introduce a topology-level reconfiguration by relocating the yaw joint. Specifically, the traditional flat foot is replaced by a wheel integrated with a direct-drive hub motor. Such motor is further reused as the yaw joint of the leg, effectively replac-ing the conventional yaw joint in the hip. By shifting leg yaw 

Fig. 4: Illustration of X2-N’s structural details (linkage and locking mechanism), and joint topology in different modes. joint to the end-effector, X2-N integrates wheel-steering mo-tors while preserving humanoid-compatible kinematics. The workspace and maneuverability of the proposed topology are analyzed along with a conventional humanoid leg in Section V, demonstrating a comparable operational capability. To further improve dynamic performance and motion agility, the knee and ankle pitch actuators are relocated closer to the CoM for reducing limb inertia [7, 8]. We further design four-bar linkage mechanisms within the limbs for power and torque transmission of these joints. In wheel-legged mode, as the yaw motion of X2-N can be achieved through wheel-velocity differentiation, the need for an explicit leg yaw joint is eliminated. Therefore, each leg is reconfigured to a 4-DoF topology including wheel steering. To omit redundant DoFs in leg of this mode, we design a structural locking mechanism and utilize the position control of ankle roll actuator to rigidly lock the wheel mount with the calf. Specifically, the mechanism has a retaining clip structure and adopt multiple contact interfaces to stabilize the wheel twist during locomotion, as shown in Fig. 4. The mode transformation is achieved by reusing the ankle roll joint to actively drive the orientation of wheel motors from horizontal foot-contact to vertical wheel-contact form. Detailed transformation control process is described in the following controller section IV. Notably, during transforma-tion, the locking mechanism can also adopt positioning and leading the ankle to the calf with a sliding slot structure. Through the design principle of joint reuse, topology reconfiguration and a locking mechanism, X2-N eliminates the need for additional dedicated actuators. Therefore, it achieves dual locomotion modes and transformation within a compact and efficient mechanical structure. C. Upper Body Design 

A key design consideration for the arms is the trade-off between manipulation dexterity and dynamic agility. To bal-ance both demands, we adopt a modular and interchangeable upper-limb design as illustrated in Fig. 4, enabling the system to equip either configuration based on the requirements. In the basic configuration of X2-N, each upper limb provides 4 DoFs, including 2 DoFs in shoulder (pitch and roll), 1 DoF in upper arm (yaw), and 1 DoF in elbow (pitch). This configuration is designed for tasks such as body-balancing and payload delivery. The forearm is implemented as a rigid link for efficient motion and load bearing. To enhance manipulation capability, the forearm can be replaced with a modular 3-DoF wrist unit (yaw, roll, pitch). The module can be installed at the elbow with minimal assembly effort. A linkage mechanism is employed to align the wrist joint axes to intersect in space, improving end-effector maneuverability. The arm can be equipped with a gripper or dexterous hand as end-effectors. The torso serves as the core structural frame for integrating major electronic components and providing mounting inter-faces for sensors and actuators. It is constructed using a hy-brid metal–polymer structure to balance stiffness and weight. A front-facing camera module is equipped for perception and teleoperation, while embedded fans provide active cooling. Wiring is routed through actuator hollow shafts to prevent cable twisting during large joint motions. 

D. Actuators and Hardware 

TABLE I: Actuator specifications                     

> Actuator R90 R57 R52 R52-U Mass (g) 990 370 360 410 Gear ratio 16 40 36 72 Peak torque (Nm) 120 30 20 40 Peak speed (rpm) 105 110 130 65

To enable high dynamic performance, four types of cus-tomized actuators are developed, as the specifications are summarized in Table I. These actuators adopt quasi-direct-drive designs with planetary gear reductions, providing high torque density, low rotor inertia, and low rotational friction. This design ensures high backdrivability and allows a near-linear mapping from currents to output torques, eliminating the need for dedicated torque sensors [21]. For high-load joints such as the elbow and ankle pitch, the motor and gearbox are decoupled and connected via belt transmission to further increase torque output while maintaining compact-ness. Cross-roller bearings are integrated at the actuator out-put shafts, enabling direct structural mounting and ensuring high stiffness under impact. The onboard computation for system control is built on a NanoPi board with a Rockchip RK3588 processor. A 10,000 mAh battery is mounted on the back of X-2N with a quick-release mechanism, providing approximately 1 hour of 

Fig. 5: Illustration of X2-N’s control architecture. operation. Power and control signals are distributed through customized domain control units (DCUs) to the four limbs. All actuators are communicated via a CAN-fd network at approximately 1 kHz. An inertial measurement unit (IMU) is mounted near the center of mass (CoM) to provide state estimation while minimizing the effects of structural vibration and deformation. IV. C ONTROL FRAMEWORK 

The control framework of X2-N integrates a RL-based controller for locomotion and transformation, with a model-based whole-body controller for manipulation. The unified architecture enables versatile and agile loco-manipulation behaviors, illustrated in Fig. 5. 

A. Locomotion Controller 

The RL-based locomotion controller is realized through Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [22] with an actor–critic architecture. We design three independent agents for loco-motion and the controller can switch between them based on working scenarios, which are defined as follows:  

> •

Wheel-legged mode , which employs wheel propulsion and steering with the legs for posture adjustment.  

> •

Foot-legged mode , which relies on legged stepping and turning with flat feet for locomotion.  

> •

Hybrid mode , which combines the above behaviors to enable dynamic, skating-like motion, thereby fully exploiting the locomotion capabilities of X2-N. All policies are trained in the Isaac Gym simulator [23] and validated in the MuJoCo simulator [24] be-fore real-world deployment. Low-level actuation employs a torque–position–velocity hybrid controller following the MIT control policy [21]. The control bandwidth is 50 Hz for learning policy inference, and 1 kHz for state estimation and actuator-level control. 

1) Wheel-legged Agent with Centrifugal Compensation :

Wheel-legged locomotion on X2-N presents significant chal-lenges due to the high-DoF legs, heavy upper body, and ele-vated CoM, compared to conventional wheel-legged robots. These factors make it more difficult to maintain balance while achieving agile locomotion, especially during high-speed maneuvers and turning. To address this, we employ a two-stage RL training strategy.  

> •

In Stage A , we first train the policy to learn fundamental wheel-based balance and velocity tracking on a flat terrain. We apply limited domain randomization and noise, and regularize joint motion to reference states.  

> •

In Stage B, the level of terrain complexity is pro-gressively increased with uneven types, such as slopes, stairs, and low-friction surfaces to improve locomotion robustness. The reference joint states are removed to allow the policy exploiting coordinated motion of both wheels and high-DoF legs for adaptive locomotion. 

Centrifugal effects substantially impacts locomotion sta-bility of X2-N with elevated CoM during high-speed turning. Therefore, we introduce a body-leaning strategy that tilts the CoM toward the turning center, using gravity for partial compensation. During training, we design a centrifugal-force-aware reward term Rcen based on a single rigid body model. The desired CoM tilt angle θdes and the corresponding reward can be derived as: 

θdes = arctan( vxωyaw 

g ), (1) 

Rcen = −(aobs  

> y

− min (0 .3, sin θdes )) 2, (2) where vx and ωyaw are the robot forward velocity and yaw angular velocity. g is the gravity term, and aobs  

> y

is the lateral-direction acceleration measured by the IMU. The constant 0.3 limits excessive body inclination for safety. This reward encourages the robot to generate appropriate body lean during turning for enhanced locomotion stability. 

2) Foot-legged Agent with Human Gait Mimicry : The key distinction of foot-legged locomotion on X2-N compared to humanoid robots lies in its joint topology reconfiguration, where the hub motor is repurposed as the leg’s yaw joint. To achieve more bio-inspired motion and improve walking nat-uralness, we incorporate human gait data from the AMASS library [25] into the controller. To achieve these capabilities, we adopt a two-stage training process.  

> •

In Stage A , the robot is trained on flat terrain to coor-dinate the yaw hub motor during stepping and turning, following desired commands. We apply a human-mimic reward Rmimic to encourage the lower limb joints of X2-N to replicate human joint reference qref . The reward 

Rmimic is defined as: 

Rmimic = exp( −2∥q − qref ∥)

− 0.2 ∗ min( ∥q − qref ∥, 0.5) . (3)  

> •

In Stage B , the training environment is gradually diver-sified with stairs, slopes, and rough terrains, promoting robustness of high-dynamic locomotion. During this stage, the mimic reward is removed to prioritize loco-motion performance. Nevertheless, the learned policy implicitly retains the human-like walking style. 

Fig. 6: Illustration of X2-N’s transformation processes. The top figures show the transition from foot-legged to wheel-legged; the bottom figures show the inverse mode transition. 

3) Hybrid Wheel-legged Agent : Training hybrid wheel-legged controller is challenging due to the unsteady bipedal single-point contacts between the arc-shaped wheel surfaces and the ground, compared to flat-foot contacts. To address such challenges, we adopt a three-stage RL curriculum.  

> •

In Stage A , we train the robot with a frequent step-ping cycle (T = 0.5 s) on flat terrains, faster than normal walking. By rapidly switching support points, the narrow-contact issue can be overcome. We further define a curve trajectory for the swing-leg end-effector.  

> •

In Stage B , the stepping duration is extended longer to 1.2s in each complete leg-switch cycle. We incorporated human walking data like foot-legged controller for bio-inspired gaits using the same reward Rmimic in foot-legged agent.  

> •

In Stage C , the training task becomes purely following body velocity commands without any reference trajecto-ries. This allows the policy to develop adaptive stepping behaviors. We then gradually introduce rough terrains for robustness under high-speed locomotion. Notably, we penalize hub motor speed to zero at stepping contact instant to reduce jitter and vibration to the body. 

B. Transformation Controller 

The training setup of the transformation controller is similar as the locomotion controller. The core challenge lies in maintaining balance under inherently unstable changing ground contacts during smooth and robust mode transforma-tion. To address this, we design two distinct transformation strategies for wheel-to-foot and foot-to-wheel transitions, illustrated in Fig. 6. 

1) From foot-legged mode to wheel-legged mode : We apply a direct ankle twisting control to reorient the wheels from horizontal to vertical transitioning mode from foot to wheel. This approach follows the potential-energy-descent principle due to the CoM depression in wheel-legged mode. The mechanical components assistant with a rapid and pre-cise ankle locking during the process. 2) From wheel-legged mode to foot-legged mode : We implement two distinct stepping motions while rotating the ankle and wheel during the air time of each step, transition-ing wheel to foot. Since single-point contact is inherently unstable, the transformation duration is gradually refined to achieve smooth transformation and balance. During training of each process, offline joint trajectories for each transformation process are precomputed using for-ward kinematics. We assign each mode a fixed phase signal, and formulate the joint trajectories as a function of this signal and the transforming duration. The robot is then trained to maintain locomotion balance during transformation while following pre-defined joint trajectories. We specially define a balance reward Rbalance during the process: 

Rbalance = k1 exp 



− θ2

> roll

σ2

> θ



+ k2 exp − θ2

> pitch

σ2

> θ

!

(4) 

+ k3 exp 



− ω2

> roll

σ2

> ω



+ k4 exp − ω2

> pitch

σ2

> ω

!

, (5) to stabilize the body CoM and pose, where k1 to k4 are term weights, θroll , θ pitch , ω roll , ω pitch are the pose angles and velocities in roll and pitch orientations, and σθ , σ ω are the scale parameters to control decay rate. 

C. Whole-body Controller 

To achieve precise and stable manipulation with system model, we develop a whole-body controller for manipulation adaptive to both arm configurations, in complement of the locomotion controller. Therefore, X2-N can achieve loco-manipulation behaviors through shared robot states. For task-driven target poses, we define end-effector tra-jectories with pose, velocity, and force vectors in Carte-sian space. The desired joint positions q and velocities 

˙q are then computed via inverse kinematics and the end-effector Jacobian matrices Jee . Furthermore, the required joint torques τ can be derived from external forces Fext using the Newton–Euler dynamic equations: 

M(q)¨q + C(q, ˙q) + g(q) = τ + Jee ⊤Fext , (6) where M(q), C(q, ˙q), g(q) represents the mass-inertia ma-trix, Coriolis, centrifugal and gravity terms. The derived joint positions, velocities, and torques are executed on the actuators via a low-level PD controller, following the MIT control policy [21]. V. S IMULATION AND EXPERIMENTS 

The locomotion and operational capabilities of X2-N were validated through both simulation and experiments across diverse scenarios, demonstrating the effectiveness of the hybrid novel form and the robustness of the platform. 

A. Workspace analysis 

To evaluate the impact of the proposed joint reconfig-uration in foot-legged mode, we compare the kinematic workspace and maneuverability of the X2-N’s leg with that of a conventional humanoid leg. For a fair comparison, 

Fig. 7: Leg-joint configuration comparison of workspace and manipulability between X2-N and conventional humanoid. both configurations share identical thigh and calf lengths, and the illustration is shown in Fig. 7. The correspond-ing Denavit–Hartenberg (DH) parameters and transformation matrices are derived to formulate the forward kinematics from the floating base (waist) to the end-effector (foot). TABLE II: Workspace and maneuverability comparison                

> Configuration X2-N leg Normal leg Ratio Volume (voxel) 0.603 0.743 81.16% Volume (convex hull) 1.440 1.640 87.80% Mean manipulability 0.0140 0.0154 90.91% Max manipulability 0.0302 0.0359 84.12%

Considering joint limits, the reachable workspace of each configuration is sampled using a Monte Carlo method [26], as illustrated in Fig. 7. The sampled points are used to construct workspace mesh surfaces, and the volume is eval-uated using both convex hull coverage [27] and voxel grid occupancy [28] methods. To further assess kinematic performance, we evaluate Yoshikawa’s manipulability index w [29] for both configura-tions. For a consistent comparison, matched sampling points with the same spatial coordinates of both configurations are identified, and the mean manipulability ¯w is computed as: 

¯w = 1

N

> N

X

> k=1

wk = 1

N

> N

X

> k=1

r

det 



Jee (qk)Jee ⊤(qk)



, (7) where N is the number of matched samples, and Jee (qk)

denotes the Jacobian matrix at k-th joint configuration qk.The results show that the proposed topology achieves a workspace volume and mean manipulability comparable Fig. 8: Three different locomotion modes of X2-N and plotted data (position, angular velocity, output torque) of some key joints (hip pitch, knee, ankle pitch and wheel). to those of a conventional humanoid leg (see Table II). Although a slight reduction in workspace is observed, the dif-ference has minimal impact on foot placement in typical lo-comotion scenarios. These results indicate that the proposed joint reconfiguration preserves high locomotion capability while enabling additional functionality for transformation and wheel integration. 

B. Locomotion Performance and Energy Evaluation 

Real-world locomotion performance was evaluated in wheel-legged, foot-legged, and hybrid modes. Simulation and experiemnts are illustrated in Figs. 8 and 9. In wheel-legged mode, we tested X2-N to traverse small ramps, perform in-place rotations on slopes, descend steps on stairs, and recover from external pushes. The legs act as an active suspension system, allowing traversal of highly uneven terrains. Leveraging its waist joint, X2-N is capable of agile omnidirectional locomotion while maintaining the upper body orientation. In foot-legged mode, X2-N behaves as a mid-size humanoid robot, performing anthropomor-phic walking, stair and slope climbing, and push recovery. Moreover, we evaluated the hybrid wheel-legged locomotion mode, enabling agile and robust “skating” (stepping forward with wheel boost) and “space-walking” (stepping forward while moving backward) behaviors. Energy consumption was analyzed across different lo-

Fig. 9: Experiments of X2-N on different scenarios: stair climbing, slope leaping, package carrying and manipulation. comotion modes by integrating each joint power of X2-N during locomotion cycles. We calculated the total energy consumption as follows: 

Etotal = 

> N−1

X

> k=0
> n

X

> i=1

η−1τi(k) ˙ qi(k)∆ tk, (8) where τi(k) and ˙qi(k) denote the torque and angular velocity of joint i at time step k, and η is the transmission efficiency from electrical power to joint output. As illustrated in Fig. 8, despite some variations across locomotion cycles, legged locomotion experiences substan-tial impact forces during each gait cycle, which can lead to structural fatigue and increased thermal load in the joints. In contrast, wheel-legged locomotion consistently reduces joint peak load and energy consumption at equivalent forward speeds, demonstrating superior stability, efficiency, and ro-bustness, and highlighting its practical advantages for diverse real-world constructed scenarios. 

C. Transformation and Operation Performance 

Transformation performance was evaluated on flat terrains, covering both wheel-to-foot and foot-to-wheel transitions. Each process completes in approximately 1s, with minimal ground footprint. After transformation, the robot’s overall pose exhibits only slight deviation. Experiments demonstrate a robust locomotion stability during mode switching under inherently unsteady contacts. We further assessed X2-N’s operational capabilities under both locomotion modes across diverse experiment scenarios. Illustrations of different tests are shown in Fig. 9. Lever-aging its high-DoF upper limbs and grippers, X2-N can perform package carrying and object manipulation, while stationary and during locomotion, including operation on stairs and slopes. In stationary conditions, the foot-legged mode provides superior resistance to external forces and heavy payloads, maintaining steadier body and end-effector states. Conversely, during movement, the wheel-legged mode effectively mitigates oscillations induced by high-frequency ground impacts during legged walking, enabling smoother and more stable loco-manipulation performance. VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this work, we presented X2-N, a novel transformable wheel-legged humanoid robot capable of dual-mode loco-motion and manipulation. The proposed lower-limb joint topology reconfiguration and transformation mechanism en-able seamless switching between wheel-legged and foot-legged modes without introducing redundant actuators. The workspace of X2-N’s leg is preserved to be comparable to conventional humanoid legs. Moreover, the interchangeable arm design further enhances operational versatility. A RL-based whole-body control framework was developed and tailored to this morphology. It integrates multiple hybrid locomotion with manipulation behaviors and allows the robot to transform for the most suitable operation mode under different tasks. Extensive simulation and real-world exper-iments validate the advantages of X2-N with transformable design, demonstrating agility, efficiency and adaptability in locomotion as well as reliability in operation. Future work will focus on enhancing perceptive loco-motion with terrain-adaptive planning and task-driven au-tonomous transformation, further extending the capabilities of this transformable wheel-legged platform for generalizable loco-manipulation applications. VII. A CKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was conducted in collaboration with the Agibot Innovation Company in Shanghai, which greatly contributed essential technical support and stimulating research envi-ronment to this study. The authors also want to express special thanks to the members of X-lab, particularly Potter Shi, Yanjie Zhang, Binbin Liu, Shitong Chen and Minghao Zhang, for their invaluable support, insightful discussions, and constructive feedback throughout the project. REFERENCES [1] Boston Dynamics, “Atlas gets a grip,” YouTube, Feb. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-e1 QhJ1EhQ [2] Unitree Robotics, “Unitree g1: Humanoid agent ai avatar,” Unitree Robotics Official Website, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www. unitree.com/g1/ [3] Figure, “Helix 02 living room tidy,” YouTube, Mar. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CAdTjePDBfc [4] M. Bjelonic, P. K. Sankar, C. D. Bellicoso, H. Vallery, and M. Hutter, “Rolling in the deep – hybrid locomotion for wheeled-legged robots using online trajectory optimization,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3626–3633, 2020. [5] LimX Dynamics, “Tron 1,” LimX Dynamics Official Website, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.limxdynamics.com/zh/products/tron1 [6] D. Liu, F. Yang, X. Liao, and X. Lyu, “DIABLO: A 6-DoF wheeled bipedal robot composed entirely of direct-drive joints,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) .IEEE, 2024, pp. 3605–3612. [7] D. E. Orin, A. Goswami, and S.-H. Lee, “Centroidal dynamics of a humanoid robot,” in 13th IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) , 2013, pp. 161–167. [8] Y. Sim and J. Ramos, “Tello leg: The study of design principles and metrics for dynamic humanoid robots,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 9318–9325, 2022. [9] Unitree Robotics, “Unitree B2-W,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.unitree.com/mobile/b2-w/ [10] J. Cheng, D. Kang, G. Fadini, G. Shi, and S. Coros, “Rambo: Rl-augmented model-based whole-body control for loco-manipulation,” 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 9462– 9469, 2025. [11] Y. Ma, A. Cramariuc, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “Learning coor-dinated badminton skills for legged manipulators,” Science Robotics ,vol. 10, no. 102, p. eadu3922, 2025. [12] Boston Dynamics, “Handle robot,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.bostondynamics.com/handle [13] H. Dai, A. Valenzuela, and R. Tedrake, “Whole-body motion planning with centroidal dynamics and full kinematics,” in IEEE-RAS Interna-tional Conference on Humanoid Robots , 2014, pp. 295–302. [14] Y. Ding, C. Khazoom, M. Chignoli, and S. Kim, “Orientation-aware model predictive control with footstep adaptation for dynamic humanoid walking,” in IEEE-RAS 21st International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) , 2022, pp. 299–305. [15] Z. Li, X. Cheng, X. B. Peng, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, G. Berseth, and K. Sreenath, “Reinforcement learning for robust parameterized loco-motion control of bipedal robots,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 2811–2817. [16] Y. Zhang, Y. Yuan, P. Gurunath, T. He, S. Omidshafiei, A.-a. Agha-mohammadi, M. Vazquez-Chanlatte, L. Pedersen, and G. Shi, “Falcon: Learning force-adaptive humanoid loco-manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06776 , 2025. [17] X. B. Peng, Z. Ma, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, and A. Kanazawa, “Amp: Adversarial motion priors for stylized physics-based character con-trol,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 1–20, 2021. [18] Q. Liao, T. Truong, X. Huang, G. Tevet, K. Sreenath, and C. K. Liu, “Beyondmimic: From motion tracking to versatile humanoid control via guided diffusion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.08241 , 2025. [19] J. P. Ara´ ujo, Y. Ze, P. Xu, J. Wu, and C. K. Liu, “Retargeting matters: General motion retargeting for humanoid motion tracking,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02252 , 2025. [20] J. Lee, M. Bjelonic, A. Reske, L. Wellhausen, T. Miki, and M. Hutter, “Learning robust autonomous navigation and locomotion for wheeled-legged robots,” Science Robotics , vol. 9, no. 89, p. eadi9641, 2024. [21] P. M. Wensing, A. Wang, S. Seok, D. Otten, J. Lang, and S. Kim, “Proprioceptive actuator design in the mit cheetah: Impact mitigation and high-bandwidth physical interaction for dynamic legged robots,” 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 509–522, 2017. [22] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [23] NVIDIA Corporation, “Isaac gym - preview release,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://developer.nvidia.com/isaac-gym [24] G. DeepMind, “Mujoco physics simulator,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/google-deepmind/mujoco [25] N. Mahmood, N. Ghorbani, N. F. Troje, G. Pons-Moll, and M. J. Black, “Amass: Archive of motion capture as surface shapes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2019, pp. 5442–5451. [26] N. Metropolis and S. Ulam, “The monte carlo method,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , vol. 44, no. 247, pp. 335–341, 1949. [27] A. Skuric, V. Padois, and D. Daney, “Approximating robot reachable space using convex polytopes,” Nov. 2022. [28] P. Anderson-Sprecher and R. G. Simmons, “Voxel-based motion bounding and workspace estimation for robotic manipulators,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , St. Paul, MN, USA, May 2012, pp. 2141–2146. [29] T. Yoshikawa, “Manipulability of robotic mechanisms,” The Interna-tional Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 3–9, 1985.