Title: A Nonlinear Model Predictive Control Perspective on Gradient-Based Optimization: A New Efficient, Parameter-Free and Provably Stable Algorithm

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.14600v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Jul 2026 00:58:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# A Nonlinear Model Predictive Control Perspective on Gradient-Based Optimization: A New E ffi cient, Parameter-Free and Provably Stable Algorithm 

Mazen Alamir a, ∗

> aUniv. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, GIPSA-lab, 38000 Grenoble, France

Abstract 

This paper discusses some aspects related to gradient-based optimization algorithms with special focus on the requirements associ-ated to their use in the implementation of Nonlinear Model Predictive Control. Based on a dedicated discussion, a new algorithm, termed Search and Accelerate ( SaA ) is proposed that mixes together a novel line search, a trust region mechanism together with an adaptation of the gradient acceleration scheme. A dedicated benchmark involving a set of 600 instances of box constrained opti-mization problems is designed and used in order to show the algorithm performances which make it a highly competitive general purpose gradient-based alternative for box-constrained optimization problems. An appealing feature of the algorithm is its robust-ness to the choice of the few parameters involved in its definition making the default values a valid option for any problem without a priori knowledge of the related Lipchitz constant. Moreover, an example of use of the proposed algorithm in NMPC implementation is proposed showing the possibility to reduce the control updating period which might be mandatory in some circumstances. 

Keywords: Gradient-Based Optimization, Line Search, Box-Constraints, Gradient Acceleration, Trust-Region, NMPC. 

1. Introduction 

There are hundreds, if not thousands, of variants of gradient-based algorithms for box-constrained optimization. Perform-ing a detailed comparison among them would go beyond any single decently short contribution. This introduction aims at recalling the major alternatives, highlighting the choices they incorporate regarding the di ff erent paradigms involved in a de-scent method. Moreover, the impact of these choices on the use of the algorithm in repetitive solving of dynamically vary-ing, di ffi cult to characterize Nonlinear Model Predictive Con-trol ( NMPC ) problems is analyzed. By so doing, the objective of this introduction is to provide a clear positioning of the pro-posed algorithm that underlines its novelties and convenience as a general purpose gradient-based solver as well as an eligi-ble and viable option for use in NMPC implementation. To this end, the competing alternatives that are used in the comparison are smoothly introduced and discussed. Before, let us recall why and when to use first order gradient-based algorithms in NMPC implementation in the first place. 

1.1. Why / When to use first order methods in NMPC? 

Nonlinear Model Predictive Control ( NMPC ) is the most ad-vanced and generic control design methodology for constrained nonlinear systems [19]. Its popularity is due to its ability to handle constraints, nonlinearities and control problem’s formu-lations that go beyond regulation and tracking. The counterpart   

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email address: mazen.alamir@grenoble-inp.fr (Mazen Alamir)

to these advantages is the need to repeatedly solve complex op-timization problems on-line. More precisely, at each updating period, a new optimization problem is formulated based on the current values of the estimated value of the state, the set-point and possibly the current estimate of the system’s parameters and the problem is solved within the available time, namely the control updating period. This amount of computation time de-pends on the level of uncertainties /disturbance that needs to be compensated for by the virtue of the control feedback. This task can theoretically be achieved using state-of-the-art, generally second order methods which are made accessible through user-friendly frameworks [7, 9, 22]. Nevertheless, many contributions [18, 20, 2, 1, 17, 15] underlined that, when systems with fast dynamics and short control updating period are considered, the elementary computation cost of a single it-eration of the optimization algorithm being used might become a critical parameter as it determines the upper bound for the feedback bandwidth 1. To say it di ff erently: For su ffi ciently fast dynamical systems, the available computation time may be so limited that performing only few iterations of a cheap gradient-based optimization algorithm becomes the only eligible strategy for implementing NMPC. Historically, the awareness of the previously stated fact came together with an increasing popularity of the Nesterov accel-eration scheme (also called the Fast Gradient Method [16]) and   

> 1The process of executing only a small number of iterations and to apply the resulting current solution that might be far from the optimal one is sometimes termed as distributing the iterations over the system’s life-time or more shortly
> real-time iterations arXiv:2607.14600v1 [cs.CE] 16 Jul 2026

hence many attempts emerged in which NMPC implementation were based on this approach that is briefly recalled hereafter. 

1.2. The Fast Gradient Method (FGM) 

Among all first order methods, the Fast Gradient Method [16] (FGM ) has been the most widely used within the NMPC com-munity. Indeed, it can be shown [6] that under some circum-stances and provided that the parameters of the FGM are appro-priately tuned, it is possible to decrease the computation time making the NMPC real-time compatible without noticeably de-teriorating the closed-loop behavior. Notice that in the FGM method, the iterate y that should con-verge to a solution of the optimization problem is updated ac-cording to: 

vk+1 = yk − αg(yk) (Gradient step) (1a) 

yk+1 = vk+1 + βk(vk+1 − xk) (Acceleration step) (1b) where the stability constraint on the step size α involved in (1a) is expressed by α ≤ 1/L, L being the Lipchitz constant of the cost function while g represent the gradient. The definition of the dynamic gain βk lies in the heart of the FGM .Notice however that, in the context of NMPC, it is very di ffi cult to appropriately tune the parameters of FGM so that a decrease of the cost function is achieved over all possible instances of the NMPC-related problem. This is because the Lipchitz con-stant L invoked above depends on the current state, the amount of change in the set-point asked by the operator and the stage cost-related penalties being used that might be changed by the designer based on the examination of the closed-loop behavior. Consequently, it seems obvious that enforcing an unconditional stability of FGM [16] through the condition α ≤ 1/L without adopting too small values of α might be risky. Now taking α excessively small so that the theoretical condi-tion is satisfied over all possible real-life instances of the opti-mization problem would very likely lead to slow convergence that would make the closed-loop unsuccessful. On the other hand, taking high values of the step size α might accelerate the convergence for some instances of the problem at the price of risking divergence in other instances which is obviously unac-ceptable for critical engineered systems. Such behaviors mate-rialize in the numerical study provided in the paper as far as the implementation of FG is concerned (see Section 4). Another reason for which the FGM is not convenient in the NMPC context is the iteration-dependent scheduled gain βk

used in (1b) which suggests that in order to cope with the the-ory, one needs to re-initialize v0, y0, β 0 each time the horizon is shifted which might be incompatible with the use of warm start. The previous discussion suggests that FGM , which represented a key advance compared to the trivial pure gradient method, is probably too simple to be used in realistic and viable industrial NMPC implementation. It is rather limited to static problems for which iterative tuning can be done until success is achieved. 

1.3. Strong Armijo-Wolf method 

The sensitivity of the fast gradient is mainly due to the absence of line-search to determine the current appropriate gradient step. Such a line search is implemented in the famous Strong Armijo-Wolf ( SAW ) algorithm [14, 10] and its many variants. This algorithm uses backtracking (successive reduction steps on α) in order to enforce both a decrease of the cost function (Armijo rule) and a decrease in the norm of the directional gra-dient (curvature condition). This is obtained at the price of eval-uating the gradient at di ff erent points through the back-tracking iterative process within a single iteration. This might increase the elementary cost of a single iteration discussed above. As a consequence of this adaptation mechanism, the SAW al-gorithm does not incorporate any acceleration step as the theo-retical stability under the acceleration step is based on the use of a constant step size α ≤ 1/L. In other words, the benefit from optimizing the step α by line-search might be negatively over-compensated by the absence of the acceleration step. 

1.4. The FISTA method 

In order to be able to use stable acceleration step in the absence of a priori knowledge of L while avoiding taking a universally small value of α, the Fast Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Al-gorithm ( FISTA ) [8, 12] does not attempt a line-search for α.Rather it looks for an estimation ˆ L of the Lipchitz constant L via a backtracking mechanism 2 and this enables to use the original acceleration scheme with a scheduled momentum gain. Notice however that by dropping the line search and setting the step size to α = 1/ ˆL, the choice might still be conservative. More precisely, the estimation process needs to start from some initial guess L0 and the choice of this key quantity is critical as the es-timation of L adopts one-side adaptation ( L can only increase). Consequently, if very high L0 is used, slow convergence is in-duced while the use of too small a value leads to slow adaptation process. This possible lack of performance, while already debatable in general, may become a strong disadvantage in the context of fast NMPC for the reasons discussed earlier. 

1.5. The Adam’s method 

It is important to underline that the comparative study does not include the nowadays very famous Adam stochastic optimiza-tion algorithm [13] that is widely used to train Deep Neural Networks. The reason is that this algorithm is obviously ori-ented towards o ff -line long training processes where the step is non uniformly adapted over the di ff erent components of the vector of decision variables and this based on a high number of previous computation instances of the gradient over the process.   

> 2Successive reduction of the value of αinitially taken su ffi ciently high.

2This is obviously incompatible with the real-time computation of continuously varying optimization problems and the need to provide a su ffi ciently good solution in few iterations in the ab-sence of previous high number of evaluations of the gradient. Based on the above discussion, the contribution of the present paper lies in the following items: 

• A new algorithm is proposed that simultaneously concili-ates line search, acceleration and stability altogether. The relevance of this contribution is not necessarily linked to the use of the algorithm in NMPC context and can be viewed as a general contribution to the literature on the gradient based iterations for its own sake. 

• A benchmark of 600 optimization problems is built and made available [5] in order to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm and to draw comparison with the previously recalled alternatives to solve box-constraints optimization problem regardless of its use in the NMPC context. 

• Finally, numerical experiments regarding the use of the al-gorithm in NMPC implementation are conducted in order to show the relevance of its use when very small updat-ing periods are necessary that go below the minimal ele-mentary computation times corresponding to higher order methods. While this fact is already reported for the FGM 

(when successful), these experiments show that this fea-ture still hold for the proposed algorithm that incorporates slightly more involved set of computation than the FGM .The paper is organized as follows. First Section 2 introduces some definitions and notation used throughout the paper. Sec-tion 3 presents the proposed algorithm and briefly analyzes its properties. Section 4 describes the benchmark used in the nu-merical investigation and comparison that are presented in Sec-tion 5. This section also shows the NMPC-related investigation. The paper ends with a conclusion summarizing its findings and describing some further investigation to come. 

2. Definitions and notation 

2.1. The optimization problem 

We are interested in the following box-constrained optimization problem: min   

> x∈[x,¯x]

f (x) (2) where x ∈ Rn is the decision variable while f is a di ff erentiable function with gradient denoted by g(x) : = ∇ f (x) ∈ Rn.Notice that the fact that (2) allows only for box constraints to be considered means that if constraints of the form: 

c j(x) ≤ 0 j ∈ { 1, . . . , nc} (3) need to be handled, they should be added to some original cost function, say f0, through strongly weighted exact penalties: 

f (x) : = f0(x) + ρcncX

> j=1

hmax(0 , c j(x)) i2

(4) leading to the function f invoked in the problem statement (2). Notice that for real-life applications, requiring the full rigorous satisfaction of some of the state constraints might lead to in-feasibility and hence unpredictable behavior of the underlying solver. Therefore, the use of soft constraints of the form (4) might be recommended even if one disposes of solvers that are able to handle non box-constrained problems. 

2.2. The projection map 

The projection map on the admissible domain [ x, ¯x] is denoted by Π, namely: 

Π(x) =



π1

...πn

 s.t πi = min  ¯xi, max  xi, xi

 (5) 

2.3. Sets of investigated steps 

When gradient-based solutions are investigated, the determina-tion of the step size along the gradient descent direction and, in the case of the proposed algorithm, along the accelerating direction as in (1b), is a key issue. The following notation is used to parameterize the set of step sizes to be investigated as shown later on. As two di ff erent line search processes will be used, there are two di ff erent parameterizations that are dis-cussed hereafter. Given a triplet ( z, ¯z, ng) ∈ R2 × N such that z < ¯z, the following two discrete sets are defined: 

Alin (z, ¯z, ng) : = nz + ing − 1 (¯ z − z)ong−1 

> i=0

(6a) 

Alog (z, ¯z, ng) : = n10 zo 

> z∈Alin (z,¯z,ng)

(6b) For instance 3:

Alin (−0.2, 1, 7) : = n−0.2, 0, 0.2, . . . , 1.0o (7a) 

Alog (−8, 0, 9) : = n10 −8, 10 −7, . . . , 0, 1o (7b) Anticipating the description of the algorithm that follows, these two families of sets will be used to perform respectively line search on the anti-gradient direction ( −g(yk)) and the momen-tum direction ( vk+1 − vk) invoked in (1b). The former involves the set Alog and the former involves the set Alin .While, for a given ng, a constant Alin is used in all the numerical   

> 3The presence of negative steps in Alin is a posteriori justified by the results of the investigation contained in Section 5.2.3.

3investigation to determine the step on the acceleration direction, the following transformations might be applied to the set Alog 

during the iterations which is used to determine the step along the gradient direction. These transformation introduce a kind of trust-region adaptation mechanism that is described in the following section 

2.4. Trust-region adaptation to Alog 

Depending on conditions that are expressed later on, one of the following transformations of the set of admissible steps Alog 

might be applied: 

• The two-side contraction defined by: 

Tc

Alog (z, ¯z, ng) = Alog (z − 1 ¯ z − 1, ng) (8) which amounts at dividing all the elements by 10, reducing hence the size of candidate steps along the gradient 4.

• The one-side contraction defined by: 

Tr

Alog (z, ¯z, ng) = Alog (z, ¯z − δz, ng) (9) where 

δz = ρ · (¯ z − z) ; ρ ∈ (0 , 1) (10) which amounts at reducing the larger step inducing a non uniform reduction among the set of eligible steps that keeps the smallest value unchanged. A typical value of 

ρ is ρ = 0.05 which is used in all the future investigations. 

• The expansion defined by: 

TE

Alog (z, ¯z, ng))  = Alog (z + γδ z, ¯z + δz, ng) (11) where δz is defined by the same expression (10) mentioned above. This operation corresponds to a non uniform ex-pansion of the gradient step candidate values. A typical value of γ ∈ (0 , 1) is γ = 0.1 which is used in all the future investigations. 

2.5. Updating rules 

Given a current iterate ξ ∈ Rn, the two previous sets enable to define two sets of candidate updates along a direction w ∈ Rn,namely: 

Clog (ξ|w, η ) : = nΠ(ξ + αw) | α ∈ 0, η ∪ Alog 

o (12a) 

Clin (ξ|w) : = nΠ(ξ + cw ) | c ∈ 0 ∪ Alin 

o (12b) The candidate values that minimize the cost function f over the two above sets are denoted as follows ( ξ being the current value, the notation ξ+ 

> log

and ξ+ 

> lin

are associated to ξ): 

ξ+

> log

(w, η ) : = arg min 

> r∈Clog (ξ|w,η )

 f (r) (13a) 

ξ+

> lin

(w) : = arg min 

> r∈Clin (ξ|w)

 f (r) (13b)      

> 4Notice however that a lower bound zmin =10 −16 is used in order to avoid z
> to totally vanish and froze future extension steps.

Notice that the optimization problems (13a) and (13b) are de-fined on discrete sets of low cardinality 5 ng + 2 and ng + 1 re-spectively and will be solved by simple enumeration. Notice that the use of η in (12a) and (13a) guarantees that the step size η remains an available option regardless of the trans-formation that Alin might face during the iteration. Similarly, the insertion of 0 inside Clin enables to ensure that the no accel-eration option is always available at the acceleration step as it is shown later on. By now we have all we need to move to the presentation of the proposed algorithm. 

3. The Search And Accelerate (SaA) algorithm 

3.1. Brief presentation of the algorithm 

As in the original FGM defined by (1), the algorithm processes two internal states, namely: 

• yk ∈ Rn represents the offi cial iterate that represents the intermediate version of the solution to (2) at iteration k.This is obtained after an acceleration step as shown below. 

• vk ∈ Rn is the iterate that is computed through a step on the gradient line before the acceleration step that leads to 

yk.The description of the algorithm is all about explaining how it updates the pair ( vk, yk). This together with some stopping conditions enables repeated application of the updating process over a finite number of iterations, say N, leading to the returned solution yN .

3.2. Detailed description of the steps 

Initialization . First of all the pair ( v0, y0) is initialized based on some provided initial guess x0 ∈ (x, ¯x): 

k = 0, vk = yk = x0 ; η = 10 −16 (14) The integer ng is chosen which enables to initialize the sets Alin 

and Alog according to: 

Alin := Alin (−0.2, 0, ng) ; Alog := Alog (−8, 0, ng) (15) 

Gradient computation . The gradient is computed at the cur-rent solution using gk = g(yk)

Gradient step . Using the definition (13a), a candidate value ˆvk+1 to vk+1 is computed: ˆvk+1 = yk

+

> log

(−gk, η ) (16) The relevance of ˆ vk+1 and the updating it should induce depend on which one of the following possibilities holds:      

> 5Typically, ng∈ { 3,5,8,10 }.

41. Either f (ˆ vk+1) ≥ f (yk) which might be due to smallest step size being too high or simply to the projection operator. In this case a two-side contraction is triggered [see (8)] that updates the set of eligible steps: 

Alog ← T c(Alog ) ; vk+1 ← vk (17) the last updating means that the candidate value ˆ vk+1

is rejected and the iteration stops with only Alog being modified. 2. Or f (ˆ vk+1) < f (yk) in which case, the update is adopted but two possibilities are to be distinguished as they lead to di ff erent updating rules for Alog :(a) If the best value corresponds to the largest update, then an extension [see (11)] is applied to Alog :

Alog ← T E (Alog ) ; vk+1 ← ˆvk+1 (18) (b) Otherwise, the best step is an intermediate one and a one-side contraction defined by (9) is applied as the minimal value is small enough (in order to tighten the interval around the successful interior step size): 

Alog ← T r(Alog ) ; vk+1 ← ˆvk+1 (19) The whole gradient step of the SaA algorithm discussed above is sketched on Figure 1.         

> Figure 1: Sketch of the gradient step .Depending on which element of
> Clog (vk| − gk, η ) is optimal, the computed candidate update ˆ vk+1is adopted or not and a specific transformation of the set of steps Alog is applied.

Recall that if the gradient step is unsuccessful, the current itera-tion stops, returns the updated set Alog . Otherwise the iteration continue with the acceleration step described below. 

Acceleration step . The objective of this step is to seek a bet-ter iterate that lies on the line defined by vk+1 − vk which is di ff erent from zero since as explained earlier, this step is fired only in case of successful gradient step and hence vk+1 , vk.More precisely, the cost function is evaluated at the elements in Clin (vk+1 | vk+1 − vk) defined by (12b). Notice that all these elements lie in the admissible domain by virtue of its very defi-nition. Consequently, the acceleration update is given by: 

yk+1 ← vk+1

+

> lin

(vk+1 − vk) (20) which fully defines the acceleration step that is summarized in Figure 2. A formal version of the whole algorithm including the gradient and the acceleration steps is also shown in Algorithm 1               

> Figure 2: Sketch of the acceleration step . After two successful gradient steps leading to vkand vk+1, an attempt is made to find a better admissible solution along the direction vk+1−vk. This is done by evaluating the cost function at the projected elements of Clin (vk+1|vk+1−vk). (The projection is not shown in the illustration). The presence of possible negative steps (represented by the point lying between vkand vk+1) is a posteriori justified by the results of the investigation contained in Section 5.2.3

3.3. Analysis of the algorithm’s properties 

The first statement concerns the complexity of the algorithm, namely: Proposition 1 (C omplexity ). A single iteration of the algorithm involves: - A single evaluation of the gradient. - At most 2ng + 3 evaluations of the cost function. 

Proof . Indeed, the gradient is only evaluated at step 2: then 

ng + 2 evaluations of the cost function are needed 6 in step 3: in order to find the best elements within Clog . Depending on the success /failure of this step, either additional ng + 1 evaluations 7

are performed in step 18: or the iteration ended by simply up-dating the search set parameter in Alog . □      

> 6This is needed to evaluate along the elements defined by Alog plus the two values in {0, η }in (12a).
> 7This is needed to evaluate along the elements defined by Alin plus the one involving 0 in (12b).

5Algorithm 1 Search & Accelerate ( SaA )

Input parameters (with suggested default values): 

ng = 5, η = 10 −16 , maxIter =200, epsG =10 −8, x, ¯ x, x0

Initialization :

Alin ← Alin (−0.2, 1, ng) ▷ Acceleration search grid (6a)                 

> Alog ←Alin (−8,1,ng)▷Gradient search grid (6b)
> k=0,v0=y0=x0,normG =∞▷Initialize the internal states

1: while (k ≤ maxIter ) and ( normG >epsG ) do 

> —– The Gradient Step —–

2: gk ← g(yk ) ▷ Evaluate gradient 

3: ˆvk+1 ← yk    

> +
> log (−gk, η )▷Gradient search candidate based on Alog

4: ˆfk+1 ← f (ˆ vk+1) ▷ Evaluate cost at the candidate value 

5: if ˆfk+1 == f (yk ) then ▷ f (yk ) is already computed to determine ˆ vk+1

6: Alog ← T c(Alog ) ▷ Two side contraction (8) 

7: (vk+1, yk+1) ← (vk , yk ) ▷ Keep the same solution 

8: k ← k + 1

9: Goto 3: 

10: else 

11: vk+1 ← ˆvk+1 ▷ Adopt the new solution 

12: if (ˆ vk+1 results from the last item in Clog (yk , gk , η )) then ▷ see (12a) 

13: Alog ← T E (Alog ) ▷ Extension 

14: else 

15: Alog ← T r (Alog ) ▷ One-side contraction 

16: end if 

17: end if 

> —– The acceleration Step —–

18: yk+1 ← vk+1       

> +
> lin (vk+1−vk)▷Update yalong the acceleration path [see (20)]

19: k ← k + 1

20: end while 

Before we state the main convergence result, we need to recall the following preliminary result [8]: Lemma 1 (D ecrease of the projected gradient update ). 

For a cost function with Lipchitz constant L, when the step size 

α satisfies α < 1/(2 L), then the resulting projected update: xk+1 = Π xk − αg(xk) (21) 

satisfies the following inequality: f (xk+1) ≤ f (xk) − h1 − αL/2i∥xk+1 − xk∥2 (22) 

Moreover, if x ⋆ is a stationary solution to (21) then x ⋆ meets the KKT optimality conditions for the optimization problem (2) .

Proof . Inequality (22) is a direct result of the condition α < 

1/(2 L) and the very definition of the Lipchitz constant. As for the second statement, see [8] . □

Proposition 2 (C onvergence ). If the following conditions hold 1) The cost function f admits a Lipchitz constant L, 2) The cost function is continuous and bounded below, 3) The parameter η involved in (12a) satisfies 8:

η < 12L , (23) 

then algorithm 1, when allowed to perform an unlimited num-ber of iterations, converges to a point that meets the KKT opti-mality conditions for the optimization problem (2) .

> 8

This condition might be satisfied by taking very small value of η without inducing slow convergence as discussed in section 3.4. 

Proof . Indeed, each time the gradient step is executed, the op-timal solution ˆ vk+1 shows necessarily a better or equal cost than the one corresponding to the element associated to η, say v[η]

> k+1

in (12a). But this candidate value associated to η is precisely defined by: 

v[η] 

> k+1

= Π (yk − ηg(yk)) (24) and since by assumption, η < 1/(2 L), inequality (22) of Lemma 1 enables to write (using the notation β := (1 − αL/2)): 

f (v[η]

> k+1

) ≤ f (yk) − β × ∥ v[η] 

> k+1

− yk∥2 (25) 

≤ f (yk) − β × ∥ Π(yk − ηg(yk)) − yk∥2 (26) and hence: 

f (ˆ vk+1) ≤ f (yk) − β × ∥ Π(yk + ηg(yk)) − yk∥2 (27) From here two situations should be considered: 1) Either the condition of step 5:, namely f (ˆ vk0+1) = f (yk0 ), is satisfied at some iteration k0, in which case, (27) implies that 0 = Π (yk0 + ηg(yk0 )) − yk0 (28) making yk0 a stationary solution to (21) and hence satisfying the KKT condition. 2) Or the algorithm always triggers the branch defined at step 10: leading to vk+1 = ˆvk+1 and injecting this in (27) leads to: 

f (vk+1) ≤ f (yk) − β × ∥ Π(yk + ηg(yk)) − yk∥2 (29) and since the acceleration step examine ( ng + 1) options inside 

Alin that include vk+1, thanks to the insertion of 0 in (12b), it comes that the finally adopted yk+1 is such that: 

f (yk+1) ≤ f (vk+1) (30) which together with (29) implies: 

f (yk+1) ≤ f (yk) − β × ∥ Π(yk + ηg(yk)) − yk∥2 (31) Now since the cost function f is continuous and bounded below, the last inequality means that the sequence {yk} converges to a stationary solution of (21) and hence asymptotically meets the KKT conditions which ends the proof. □

3.4. Discussion 

The aim of this discussion is to highlight some details of the im-plementation that enable to overcome the limitations underlined in the introduction and leading to enhancing both performance and stability of the iterations. 

✓ Notice first of all the role played by the inclusion of an ex-tremely small 9 η in Clog which enabled through the equa-tions (24)-(27) to derive the inequality needed for the proof of stability. 

> 9

Default value is η = 10 −16 .

6✓ Contrary to traditional approaches involving constant gra-dient steps, the use of extremely small values for η does not induce slow convergence rates thanks to the fact that the other options in Clog are systematically investigated 

(in step 3:) through function evaluations over the elements of the set Clog (yk| − g(yk), η ) enabling fast decrease (when possible) while using very small values of η.

✓ While traditionally, the acceleration is avoided when the gradient step is dynamically updated, the inclusion of sev-eral acceleration gains (including 0) is here used to get the inequality (30) that guarantees the overall decrease in an acceleration-enabled context. This enables to combine the search for better decrease in the gradient step while allow-ing for the acceleration step to be examined. 

✓ Contrary to the FGM method, the previous analysis of the algorithm’s properties does not include formal results regarding the convergence rate. While this might be at-tempted, it is our belief that what does really matter in NMPC is the behavior of the algorithm during the first it-erations, namely, the iterations that last less than the con-trol updating period. The results shown in the next section suggests a quite impressive experimentally assessed con-vergence rate. It might even be conjectured that the will to get a provable convergence rate of 1 /k2 for the FGM lies behind not using the so simple ideas proposed in the cur-rent contribution which leads to much better results with guaranteed stability. The objective of the next section is to examine and compare such a behavior among algorithms belonging to few di ff erent families and when used to address a high number of randomly generated problems that belong to an existing and available benchmark of problems that are described hereafter. 

4. The benchmark 

The benchmark used here in the evaluation of the algorithm is made publicly available in a K aggle repository [5]. It consists in 600 optimization problems 10 of the form: min  

> x∈X

f (x) : = P(x) − P(x⋆) 2m ; X := [−5, +5] n (32) where P is a multivariate polynomial in the variable x ∈ Rn.Both P and x⋆ take di ff erent value depending on the problem and are randomly generated. The degrees of the polynomial takes values inside deg ∈ { 1, 2, 3}, the integer m ∈ { 1, 2}. This means that the cost functions are polynomial of degrees that lie inside {2, 4, . . . , 12 }. The dimension of the decision variable takes di ff erent values ranging from n = 2 to n = 1000, more precisely, 10 di ff erent values of n are used inside the following set: 

n ∈ { 2, 5, 10 , 15 , 20 , 50 , 100 , 200 , 500 , 1000 } (33) 

> 10 The repository enables to download the list of problems as python objects that export two methods representing the cost function and the gradient.

For each of the 60 values of the triplet ( deg , n, m), 10 random problems are generated. For Five of these 10 problems, the value of x⋆ is randomly generated inside the admissible set X

while in the remaining 5, x⋆ is forced to lie outside the hyper cube. By so doing, we force the optimal value of the cost func-tion to be equal to 0 for the first group of problems while this is not guaranteed for the second so that many instances of the problem correspond to optimal solutions that are not stationary points for the gradient. Notice that given the relatively high degrees of the polynomi-als involved in the cost functions, there might be several min-ima with zero value that lie inside the admissible hyper-cube [−5, +5] n so we focus on the value of the cost function rather than on how the solutions found by the algorithm relate to the specific value of the parameter x⋆ for each problem. In order to get comparable and reproducible results, the same initial guess x0 = (0 .1, . . . , 0.1) T is used for all the algorithm and all the instances of the problem. 

5. Numerical investigation 

Let us start by stating the precise settings for the di ff erent solvers. 

5.1. Settings for alternative solvers 

As previously explained, the ability of a solver to operate with a unique setting for all possible problems is mandatory should it be applied to NMPC. That is the reason why comparisons are drawn between solvers that keep their setting unchanged over the whole set of 600 optimization problems included in the benchmark. Nevertheless, for a fair comparison, di ff erent such unchanged 

settings might be used in order to show the extent to which the setting impacts the comparison. 

5.1.1. Settings for FGM 

For this solver, the only possible parameter is the gradient step size α (which is expected to be lower than the unknown 1 /L.The βk gain used in the acceleration step is defined following the rules defined in [16] which is supposed to induce stability provided that the previous condition on α is satisfied. In order to show the impact of this choice, three values of α are investi-gated, namely 

α ∈ { 10 −5, 10 −10 , 10 −16 }

as these values enable to explore fast but risky settings as well as safe but potentially ine ffi cient settings. 

5.1.2. Settings for FISTA 

Recall that FISTA implements an estimation of L through a backtracking process. More precisely, an initial estimate L0 is initialized and the process amounts at increasing the value of 7the current estimation each time a failure in decrease is encoun-tered. The expansion rate is set to 2 while two di ff erent values of the initial guess L0 are investigated, namely: 

L0 ∈ { 10 −6, 1, 10 6}

Notice that FISTA implements an acceleration step that is the same as in the FGM .

5.1.3. Settings for Strong Armijo-Wolf 

This method does not implement an acceleration step but uses more involved line search that aims at increasing the e ffi ciency of the gradient step. As explained earlier, this involves the en-forcement of the decrease of the cost function and the decrease of gradient norm (curvature condition). These two conditions involve two constants c1 and c2 which are taken respectively equal to the default values recommended in [14, 10], namely: 

c1 = 10 −4 ; c2 = 0.9The initial value of α is taken equal to 1 and the adaptation gain β = 0.5 is used. As this method is an adaptive method, the impact of these parameters on the results is minor (and it appeared to be so in the experiments). Therefore, the unique setting described by the above values is used for this method in order to avoid overloading the comparison figure’s below. 

5.1.4. Settings for the proposed SaA algorithm 

As far as the proposed algorithm is concerned, only the num-ber ng of search values inside the set of steps Alog and Alin is explored. More precisely, the following values are tested: 

ng ∈ { 3, 8, 20 }

each of which is kept constant over all the problems. All the other parameters of the algorithms take the default value shown in the description of the Algorithm [see the initialization step of Algorithm 1). 

5.2. Results on the benchmark’s problems 

In the forthcoming experiments, a maximum number of itera-tions is fixed to maxIter =200 with an early stopping criterion associated to the norm of the gradient being lower than 10 −8.

5.2.1. Cost achieved with maxIter = 200 Figure 3 shows the statistics (percentiles) of the final achieved cost within the allowed 200 iterations for the di ff erent pairs of (algorithm /settings) described in Section 5.1. This figure suggests the following comments: 

• First of all the FGM with high α (10 −5) diverges for a non negligible part of the set of problems while the one with much lower α (10 −10 ) shows, as expected, rather bad achieved cost resulting from the slow convergence and the limited number of iterations. This is precisely the unsolv-able dilemma that is associated to the choice of a constant (non adaptable) α that has been already discussed earlier in the paper. Given the bad performance of FGM with 

α = 10 −10 , the results using α = 10 −16 were omitted in the figure. 

> Figure 3: statistics (percentiles) of the final cost achieved within the allowed 200 iterations for the di ff erent pairs of (algorithm /settings) described in Section 5.1.

• Regarding FISTA , the use of backtracking penalizes the use of high values of initial L0 inducing slow conver-gence. Smaller values give better results which remains highly outperformed by the SaA in all its settings. This is most likely due to the absence of search in the accelera-tion step. This results in orders of magnitude in the final achieved cost over almost 40% of the problems included in the benchmark. 

• Regarding the Srong Armijo-Wolf line-search based al-gorithm, it clearly lies between the FGM and the FISTA 

with quite bad final achieved cost over 40% of the prob-lems. 

• The proposed SaA clearly outperforms the other alterna-tives and inside the set of settings for SaA and as far as the final cost within the 200 allowed iterations is considered, the higher ng the lowest is the final achieved cost which is no surprise as long as the associated computation cost is not investigated yet. It is worth underlying that the highest values of the final cost (around 10 25 might suggest that the iteration diverges for some of the problems and this even for SaA but this is not the case as it is shown in Figure 4. Indeed this figure shows the ratio be-tween the finally achieved cost and the initial value of the cost for each of the 600 problems. This figure shows that except for one problem where the final cost is infinitely close to the initial one (contraction lower than 0.99), all the instances of the prob-lem correspond to a (rather drastic) contraction in accordance with the convergence result. In order to explain the very high values of the final cost for a tiny fraction of the problems as shown in Figure 3, it is worth remembering that while the admissible set is [ −5, 5] n, the vec-8Figure 4: The ratios between the finally achieved cost and the initial value of the cost for each of the 600 problems. Notice that the colors refer to the dimension of the decision variables. 

tor x⋆ involved in (32) is not necessarily inside this set. This with the fact that, as it is explained in Section 4, some of the optimization problems shows a cost function that is a polyno-mial of degree 12 (this is the case when deg =3 and m = 2) lead to few problems for which the algorithm reaches rapidly a KKT point that lies on the boundary of the admissible hypercube and which corresponds to a cost function value that is extremely close to the value at the initial guess. From the results of Figure 3, it is fair to conclude that SaA 

achieves the best costs among almost all the 600 optimization problems. Actually the returned solutions represent the optimal cost for more than 97% of the problems as the optimal returned values are numerically ≈ 0, for the remaining problems it can be conjectured that the returned solutions which are not vanishing (because when x⋆ lies outside the admissible domain), the truly optimal value may not be 0. Figure 4 shows that for all the problems, except one, the contraction of the cost function value is better than 10 −12 .This being said, we still need to investigate whether this perfor-mance in terms of the final cost is obtained at the cost of larger computation times. 

5.2.2. Computation time 

Figure 5 shows the statistics of the computation times when solving the optimization problems included in the benchmark. This figure shows that for almost all the problems, the proposed algorithm ( SaA ), regardless of its settings (value of ng) achieves the best cost and simultaneously needs less time than all the other alternatives. For relatively large computation times, the 

SaA is more than 10 times faster than the closest of the other solvers. A noticeable fact is that when examining the di ff erent settings of SaA , the computation time does not necessarily increase when the number of exploration points ng increases. This fact 

> Figure 5: Statistics of the computation times when solving the optimization problems included in the benchmark using the di ff erent pairs of (algorithm /set-ting).

can be clearly observed when comparing the computation times for settings defined by ng = 20 and ng = 8. This can be eas-ily explained by the impact of this choice on the number of required iterations before reaching a solution (see Figures 6-7). Indeed Figure 6 and its zoomed version depicted on Figure 7, show statistics of the number of iterations (necessarily limited to 200 by choice) needed by the di ff erent solvers. The curves enable to understand why, in the case of SaA , despite the higher cost of a single iteration induced by the choice ng = 20 com-pared to ng = 3, the number of needed iteration is lower as the rate of decrease of the cost function per iteration is higher. Figure 6 also shows that because of the comparatively slow con-vergence of the FGM , all the settings of this algorithm needed the maximum number of iteration (200) as the stopping crite-rion is never satisfied for these alternatives. This is also the case for the FISTA when the conservative L0 = 10 6 is used. On the other hand, taking too small a value, like L0 = 10 −6 induces higher number of iterations as the backtracking algorithm needs more time to reach a good estimation of the Lipchitz constant 

L.

5.2.3. Statistics of the steps along the acceleration path 

Let us end this section by investigating the statistics of the value taken by the acceleration step, namely the step along the direc-tion vk+1 − vk implemented in step 18: of the algorithm which implements the updating rule (20). Recall that possible values of this step is controlled by the set of steps included in the set 

Alin defined by (6a). For a step equal to 0 no acceleration is ap-plied and the update resulting from the searched gradient step is adopted. When positive values are used, this implement a posi-9Figure 6: Statistics of the number of iterations (necessarily limited to 200 by choice) needed by the di ff erent solvers   

> Figure 7: Zoom on the plot of Figure 6 centered on the small number of itera-tions required by the proposed SaA algorithm.

tive momentum along the direction vk+1 − vk. Finally, negative steps lead to iterate that strictly lie inside the segment ( vk, vk+1). The statistics of the 20,400 step values selected by the SaA al-gorithm over the 600 problems of the benchmark by the three investigate settings (corresponding to ng ∈ {3, 8, 20 } which changes the values in Alin ) lead to the normalized histogram shown in Figure 8. The remarkable fact is that the negative value c = −0.2 appears to be the most frequent value selected by the algorithm (almost 30% of the instances). This results is not a priori expected and legitimates the definition of the the set of possible steps Alin in that it should contain negative values. The presence of some 12% of instances where c = 0 is chosen corresponds to situa-tions where using the acceleration would have been detrimental to the objective of decreasing the cost function leading to the use of the sole gradient descent step.         

> Figure 8: Statistics (Histogram) of the step sizes cused in the acceleration step and taken by the three di ff erent versions of the SaA algorithm during the 600 optimization problems contained in the benchmark and for di ff erent setting of
> ng∈ { 3,8,20 }used in the proposed solver.

The examination of the results enables to state the following claim: Despite the variety of problems included in the benchmark, the default parameters together with any of the suggested values of ng enable to successfully solve all the problems in less than 200 iterations. This is obtained thanks to the adaptation mecha-nisms and the incorporation of cost function explo-ration at each iteration of the algorithm. This justifies the parameters-free qualification of the proposed algorithm that is used in the paper’s title. This does not mean the absence of parameters but the robustness of the results to their specific choice making the default values always successful. 

> Parameter -free ?

5.3. Example of use in NMPC real-time implementation 

In this section, we investigate the use of the proposed gradient based algorithm in implementing constrained NMPC feedback control. But before we dig into this task, let us highlight the following disclaimer: The message of this section is not to promote the unconditional use of the proposed gradient-based solver in the implementation of NMPC feedback. Rather, it is to consider it as a viable option for cer-tification when very short control updating periods are mandatory or simply when standard advanced 

solvers do not meet the real-time implementation re-quirements. 

> Disclaimer

10 Notice that the need for certification holds for any NMPC im-plementation in which the optimization process is interrupted and the necessarily sub-optimal solution is used to define the control to be applied. This is because in such circumstances, the theoretical foundation of the stability are not satisfied re-gardless of the NMPC formulation being used. For more details about the certification of NMPC, see [1, 3]. 

5.3.1. The NMPC problem 

For the sake of illustration, we consider the Planar Vertical Take-of and Landing ( PVTOL ) aircraft example [11] whose dynamics can be described by the following set of ODEs: ¨y = −u1 sin θ + ϵu2 cos θ, (34a) ¨z = + u1 cos θ + ϵu2 sin θ − 1, (34b) ¨θ = u2 (34c) that we need to regulate around ( y, z, θ ) = 0 using bounded con-trol 

u ∈ [−1.5, +1.5] × [−0.5, 0.5] while meeting the following constraints on the state (limited rate of change on z and θ): 

|˙z| ≤ 0.5 ; |˙θ| ≤ 0.4 (35) The NMPC formulation used hereafter is the one recently pro-posed in [4] that shows the advantage of providing stability for prediction horizons that do not meet the reachability condition. The cost function is given by: 

J(u|x0) : = γ2∥ ˙xN ∥ + γℓ (xN ) + ∥xN ∥Q f +

> N

X

> k=0

ℓ(xk, uk) (36) where ℓ(x, u) incorporates the original regulation cost aug-mented with the exact penalty on the constraint violation: 

ℓ(x, u) : = ∥x − xd∥2 

> Q

+ ∥u − ud∥2 

> R

+ ρsoft ×

> 4

X

> i=1

max 0, ci(x) 2 (37) where ci(x), i = 1, . . . , 4 correspond to the four constraints defined by (35). The steady state is defined by xd =

(yd, zd, 0, 0, 0, 0) and the steady control is ud = (1 , 0). In all the numerical investigation γ = 200 and ρsoft = 10 7 are used. The parameters ϵ = 0.4 is used in (34a) and (34b). The sampling period τ = 0.1 and the prediction horizon N = 50 are adopted. 

5.3.2. The alternative solver: fatrop 

In order to compare the performance and the computation times of the proposed SaA algorithm with a standard state of the art higher order solvers, the recently proposed fatrop 11 algorithm is used in the comparison. The reason for this choice is twofold:     

> 11 This is an Interior-Point algorithm that is dedicated to solving optimal con-trol problem unlike the famous ipopt [23] commonly used as the default option within Casadi that is a general purpose interior point algorithm.

• First, this solver is smoothly integrated in the Casadi 

framework which is also used in the computation of the cost function and the gradient as used by the SaA algo-rithm. The use of the famous state of the art acados [22] solver requires a reformulation of the problem to fit its own syntax. 

• More importantly, it has been shown that Fatrop provides performance and computation times that are quite compa-rable to the acados solver. In particular Table IV in [21] where some examples of the same category 12 of problems as the one considered here are investigated, shows that fat-rop and acados [22] produce quasi identical results within comparable computation times. When comparing SaA to fatrop , two versions will be com-pared, namely, the pure python version and the C ++/ compiled version of each algorithm. More precisely: 

• In the pure python version, the optimization problem is simply formulated using the Casadi framework’s nlpsol 

without compilation option for fatrop while the cost func-tion and the gradient map are also provided using the 

Casadi ’s Function utility (without compilation option) starting from the same definitions of the maps used as ar-gument to nlpsol to set the fatrop solver. 

• In the compiled versions, the nlpsol is called with the following options dictionary:       

> j i t _ o p t s ={" j i t " : True , " c o m p i l e r " : " s h e l l " , " j i t _ o p t i o n s " : {" f l a g s " : ’−O2 ’ }}
> Compilation option

which provides an optimized casadi native compiled ver-sion of the fatrop algorithm. As for the SaA algorithm, the same compilation options is used in the creation of the cost function and the gradient through the Function utilities provided by Casadi . This is not necessarily the most opti-mized version as all the remaining computations involved in the SaA such as the multiple calls for the cost func-tion during the two line search operation are still coded in python leading to an extra calls-related overhead that can be removed by totally compiling the whole algorithm. Remark 1 (W hy to show pure python comparison also ). It is important to underline that while the compilation of the SaA 

algorithm needs few seconds, the one involved in the use of 

> 12 number of state, control inputs, prediction horizon, etc.

11 the above mentioned compilation option in nlpsol requires around 30 min of processing 13 . This can become cumbersome during the mandatory prototyping phase. That is the reason for which comparisons are also given for pure python versions of the algorithms. 5.3.3. Protocol and metrics for the comparison 

Without loss of generality, the targeted steady state is taken equal to xd = 0 ∈ R6 and ud = (1 , 0) and only the initial state is selected to define a scenario. This can recover any possibe pair of ( x0, xd) of initial state and desired state by simple translation. A number nSamples = 100 of scenarios are generated corre-sponding to di ff erent initial states inside [ −0.5, 0.5] 6. For each scenario, closed-loop trajectories under the di ff erent NMPC controllers are simulated over Nsim = 251 sampling periods and the resulting closed-loop trajectories and computation times are compared following the protocol defined below. First of all, in order to compare the convergence behavior, a convergence-related scalar is associated to each closed-loop tra-jectories using the following steps: 

• The sequence of values of the returned sub-optimal open-loop cost obtained by the optimizer at each instant along the closed-loop trajectory is obtained, say Jcl  

> k

. For well formulated NMPC with completed optimization, this se-quence should be strictly decreasing. 

• A normalized sequence is obtained by using: ¯Jcl k := Jcl 

> k

Jcl 0

(38) For typically successful closed-loop, this sequence is strictly decreasing with 1 as initial value. 

• One way to associate a scalar that summarizes the possi-ble contraction along the sequence over the whole closed-loop trajectory is to find the maximum rate of exponen-tial decrease that upper bounds the normalized sequence, namely: 

μ∗ = max n μ s.t. ∀k, ¯Jcl  

> k

≤ e−μk o (39) Obviously, the larger (positive) μ∗ the faster is the con-vergence over the duration of the closed-loop simulation scenario. 

• The comparison of the performances of two algorithms, say A1 and A2 is obtained by observing the statistics (per-centiles) of the ratios RA1/A2 between their μ⋆-associated values over the 100 scenarios used in the investigation, namely the percentiles of the quantity: 

RA1/A2 := μ⋆

> A1

μ⋆

> A2

(40) 

> 13 On a MacBook Pro, Apple M3 Pro, 18 Go under Tahoe 26.5.1

While the percentiles of the RA1/A2 indicator enable to compare the convergence rates, the key advantage of using the gradient-based algorithm is related to the minimal achievable computa-tion time. This will be compared by examining the histogram of the computation times needed at each updating periods over the closed-loop simulations of all the 100 scenarios. But before digging into such blind statistics over many sce-narios, let us give typical instances of closed-loop trajectories during a single closed-loop scenario. This is depicted in Fig-ure 9 which shows a single scenario under compiled multiple-shooting fatrop algorithm (with maxIter =1) on one hand and under the proposed compiled SaA algorithm (with maxIter =5) on the other hand.               

> (Multiple shooting compiled fatrop |maxIter =1)
> (Proposed gradient based SaA |ng=8|maxIter =5)
> Figure 9: Typical comparison between closed-loop trajectories under compiled
> multiple shooting fatrop and a compiled version of the proposed gradient based
> SaA algorithm. Notice the soft constraints satisfaction, the slight deterioration of performance against drastic (8-9 times faster) drop in the worst computation time. Dash-dotted lines without legend represent the constraints on the state.

This typical example show a commonly encountered behavior where at the cost of possible slight decrease of performance, the gradient-based algorithm o ff ers a drastic reduction of the ele-mentary computation time. Notice that the use of maxIter =1in the case of fatrop shows the incompressible amount of com-putation needed for a single iteration of this algorithm. The same comparison is reported on Figure 10 in the case where non compiled pure-python versions of the algorithms are used. No-tice that the use of maxIter =10 in SaA (instead of maxIter =5in Figure 9) leads to closer trajectories to the ones obtained under fatrop and to tighter fulfillment of the state constraints while keeping a drastic increase in the computation time that can be quite welcome in the prototyping phase avoiding the rather long compilation time. Figure 11 shows the percentiles of the contraction’s exponent 12 (Multiple shooting compiled fatrop | maxIter =1)              

> (Proposed gradient based SaA |ng=8|maxIter =10)
> Figure 10: Typical comparison between closed-loop trajectories under pure-python multiple shooting fatrop and a pure python version of the proposed gradient based SaA algorithm. Notice the soft constraints satisfaction, the slight deterioration of performance against drastic drop in the worst computation time. Dash-dotted lines without legend in the speeds-related subplots represent the constraints on the state.

ratio RSaA /fatrop defined by (40), namely: 

RSaA /fatrop = μ⋆

> SaA |maxIter =3,5,10

μ⋆

> fatrop |maxIter=1

(41) for di ff erent values o the maxIter arguments for SaA while 

maxIter =1 is systematically used for fatrop in order to seek minimum computation time.         

> Figure 11: Percentiles of the contraction’s exponent ratio RSaA /fatrop defined by (40) for di ff erent values of the maxIter argument for SaA while maxIter =1for fatrop .

Recall that the higher the ratio the better the contraction com-pared to the reference method (here fatrop with maxIter =1). On the other hand, Figure 11 shows the expected fact that when more iterations are allowed, the contraction per sampling period is better. It is noticeable to observe that for the case where maxIter =5 is used for SaA , almost exactly 50% of the scenarios shows higher contraction of SaA while the remaining 50% gives advantages to the fatrop algorithm. These percentage shift to (70%, 30%) and (40%, 60%) for maxIter =10 and maxIter =3 respectively. Now since Figure 11 shows only a ratio, it is interesting to show the percentile of the values taken by the denominator in (41). This is shown in Figure 12 where the percentiles of the contrac-tion exponent of the fatrop algorithm, namely: 

μ⋆

> fatrop |maxIter=1

involved in (41) are shown.     

> Figure 12: statistics (percentiles) of the contraction rate μ⋆
> fatrop |maxIter=1 with respect to which the ratios shown in Figure 11 are computed. The minimal value ( ≈0.28) indicates that contraction arises in all the 100 scenarios used in the investigation.

This Figure shows in particular that the minimum value of the contraction’s exponent over all the scenario is greater than 0.28. This means that in all the scenarios, contraction is e ff ective and this holds for all the algorithms referenced in Figure 11. Remark 2 ( soft constraints → different cost function ). It is important to notice however that because of the use of soft con-straints in SaA , the cost function is not necessarily the same for both algorithms should the initial guess leads to constraints violation. Nevertheless, as the value of each cost function is normalized by its own initial value, the contraction concept is relevant for each algorithm. Moreover, as the inequality used in the definition of the bound in (39) applies to the whole rather long scenario at the end of which the constraints are generally inactive, the two cost functions becomes rigorously identical over a large part of the closed-loop simulation. 

Remark 3 (T he systematic use of maxIter =1 for fatrop ). It is important to keep in mind that our aim here is to compare the extent to which the elementary computation time of the reference solver can be reduced. More importantly, the aim is to see to which extent, the SaA is able to achieve successful closed-loop while requiring much smaller elementary compu-tation times. Hence by using maxIter =1 for fatrop enables to 

13 show that for this solver, the minimum amount of elementary computation time reaches a kind of hard lower bound that cannot be reduced. It is only then that the relevance of the gradient-based algorithm SaA becomes obvious. In other words, no matter how much increase in the performance of 

fatrop can be reached by increasing its maxIter parameters, the corresponding computation time can only be higher and hence not eligible in some circumstances. 

Now that we can shortly state that in terms of the performance, (fatrop | maxIter =1) and ( SaA | maxIter =5) are quite com-parable, it is time to examine the statistics of the computation times.              

> Figure 13: Statistics (percentiles) of the ratios of computation times (cpu fatrop /cpu SaA ) over all the first msampling periods of all the 100 scenarios for the compiled versions of the algorithms.

Figure 13 shows the percentiles of the ratios of computation times of the ( fatrop | maxIter =1) algorithm relative to those of the ( SaA | maxIter =5) algorithm for all the first m sampling periods of all the 100 simulated closed-loop scenario and this for di ff erent values of m ∈ { 1, 2, 5, 251 }.Notice that for m = 251, the percentiles are computed for the total number of sampling periods. While for the smaller values of m ∈ { 1, 2, 5}, the statistics incorporate the very first sampling periods of each scenario where the computation times take sys-temically the highest values. The plots of Figure 13 suggests that when the computation times are high (during the few sampling instants after a change in the set-point), the reduction in the computation time o ff ered by the SaA gradient-based algorithm, compared to the fatrop 

algorithm, reach values ranging from a factor of 5 to 9. For stationary regime periods, the reduction factor is around 2, as it can be clearly seen on the typical example shown in Figure 9. Finally, Figure 14 shows the same results as the ones shown in Figure 13 in the case where non compiled pure python versions of the algorithms are used. One can observe a higher rate of reduction in the computation times suggesting that the compi-lation of the gradient-based algorithm is not optimized as the one used in the Casadi utility.              

> Figure 14: Statistics (percentiles) of the ratios of computation times (cpu fatrop /cpu SaA ) over all the first msampling periods of all the 100 scenarios for the pure python versions of the algorithms.

6. Conclusion and future work 

In this paper, a new gradient-based algorithm is proposed for box-constrained optimization problems for which the cost func-tion and its gradient are available. Unlike existing gradient-based alternatives, the proposed algo-rithm, termed SaA for Search & Accelerate combines a novel line search (with a trust region adaptation mechanism) along the gradient and another novel line search over the Nesterov accel-eration path while being supported by a rigorous convergence proof. A benchmark including 600 box constrained optimization prob-lems is also proposed and made publicly available showing that the proposed algorithm outperforms existing alternatives in both computation time and solution quality. Finally, the relevance of the proposed gradient-based algorithm 

SaA for NMPC implementation when very small control up-dating periods are required has been shown through a dedicated case study. Undergoing work is twofold: first, a sparsity-aware version of the algorithm is under investigation; then the application of the algorithm in e ffi ciently training (dense /sparse) neural networks will be undertaken. 

References 

[1] Alamir, M., 2015. From certification of algorithms to cer-tified MPC: The missing links. IFAC-PapersOnLine 48, 65–72. 5th IFAC Conference on Nonlinear Model Predic-tive Control NMPC 2015. 14 [2] Alamir, M., 2017. A state-dependent updating period for certified real-time model predictive control. IEEE Trans-actions on Automatic Control 62, 2464–2469. [3] Alamir, M., 2025a. Derivation of certification-based ad-missibility dashboard of NMPC implementation settings: Framework and associated python package. IEEE Trans-actions on Control Systems Technology 33, 815–822. [4] Alamir, M., 2025b. On relaxing the n-reachability implicit requirement in NMPC design. IEEE Control Systems Let-ters 9, 1628–1633. [5] Alamir, M., 2026a. Collection of gradient-based opti-mization problems. URL: https://www.kaggle.com/ ds/10894951 , doi: 10.34740/KAGGLE/DS/10894951 .[6] Alamir, M., 2026b. Solving Deterministic Model Predictive Control Problems. Springer Nature Switzer-land, Cham. pp. 217–261. URL: https://doi. org/10.1007/978-3-031-93287-8_5 , doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-031-93287-8_5 .[7] Andersson, J.A.E., Gillis, J., Horn, G., Rawlings, J.B., Diehl, M., 2019. Casadi: A software framework for non-linear optimization and optimal control. Mathematical Programming Computation 11, 1–36. [8] Beck, A., Teboulle, M., 2009. A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm for linear inverse problems. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences 2, 183–202. [9] Gillis, J., Vandewal, B., Pipeleers, G., Swevers, J., 2020. Eff ortless modeling of optimal control problems with rockit, in: Proceedings of the 39th Benelux Meeting on Systems and Control. [10] Hager, W.W., Zhang, H., 2005. A new conjugate gra-dient method with guaranteed descent and an e ffi cient line search. SIAM Journal on Optimization 16, 170–192. doi: 10.1137/030601880 .[11] Hauser, J., Sastry, S., Meyer, G., 1992. Nonlinear control design for slightly non-minimum phase systems: Appli-cation to v /stol aircraft. Automatica 28, 665–679. [12] Kim, D., Fessler, J.A., 2018. Another look at the fast iterative shrinkage /thresholding algorithm (fista). SIAM Journal on Optimization 28, 223–250. doi: 10.1137/ 16M108940X .[13] Kingma, D.P., Ba, J., 2015. Adam: A method for stochas-tic optimization, in: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). URL: 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980 .[14] Moré, J.J., Thuente, D.J., 1994. Line search algorithms with guaranteed su ffi cient decrease. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software 20, 286–307. [15] Necoara, I., 2015. Computational complexity certification for dual gradient method: Application to embedded mpc. Systems & Control Letters 81, 49–56. [16] Nesterov, Y., 2004. Introductory Lectures on Convex Op-timization : A Basic Course. Applied Optimization, 87. 1st ed. 2004. ed., Springer US, New York, NY. [17] Patrinos, P., Bemporad, A., 2014. An accelerated dual gradient-projection algorithm for embedded linear model predictive control. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Con-trol 59, 18–33. doi: 10.1109/TAC.2013.2275667 .[18] Peyrl, H., Zanarini, A., Besselmann, T., Liu, J., Boéchat, M.A., 2014. Parallel implementations of the fast gradient method for high-speed mpc. Control engineering practice 33, 22–34. [19] Rawlings, J.B., Mayne, D.Q., 2009. Model Predictive Control: Theory and Design. Nob Hill Publishing, Madi-son, Wisconsin. [20] Richter, S., Jones, C.N., Morari, M., 2012. Computational complexity certification for real-time mpc with input con-straints based on the fast gradient method. IEEE transac-tions on automatic control 57, 1391–1403. [21] Vanroye, L., Sathya, A., De Schutter, J., Decre, W., 2023. Fatrop: A fast constrained optimal control problem solver for robot trajectory optimization and control, in: Proceed-ings of the ... IEEE /RSJ International Conference on In-telligent Robots and Systems, IEEE. pp. 10036–10043. [22] Verschueren, R., Frison, G., Kouzoupis, D., Frey, J., van Duijkeren, N., Zanelli, A., Novoselnik, B., Albin, T., Quirynen, R., Diehl, M., 2022. acados: A modular open-source framework for fast embedded optimal con-trol. Mathematical Programming Computation 14, 147– 183. [23] Wächter, A., Biegler, L.T., 2006. On the implementation of an interior-point filter line-search algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming. Mathematical Program-ming 106, 25–57. 15