Title: COSMIC: Concurrent Optimization of Structure, Material, and Integrated Control for robotic systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12654v1

Published Time: Thu, 14 May 2026 00:09:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# COSMIC: C ONCURRENT OPTIMIZATION OF STRUCTURE ,MATERIAL , AND INTEGRATED CONTROL FOR ROBOTIC SYSTEMS 

A P REPRINT 

Qinsong Guo 

Dept. of Mechanical Engineering Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA 15213 

timg@andrew.cmu.edu 

Liwei Wang ∗

Dept. of Mechanical Engineering Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA 15213 

liweiw@andrew.cmu.edu 

May 14, 2026 

# ABSTRACT 

Replicating and surpassing the autonomy of natural organisms remains a long-standing goal in robotics. Yet most robotic systems have their structure, materials, and control designed separately, in sharp contrast to the co-evolution in nature. This separation often leads to suboptimal designs, and we still have a limited understanding of the individual and collective contributions of these design entities. In this work, we propose a gradient-based co-design framework that simultaneously optimizes the topology, material distribution, and control policy of a truss-lattice robot. The framework embeds mixed-type topological and material variables into a continuous design space and integrates a neural network controller within a differentiable simulator, capturing their interactions and enabling efficient gradient calculation via automatic differentiation. Furthermore, we develop a constrained optimization to navigate the highly non-convex design landscape and jointly optimize all design entities. Case studies demonstrate that the proposed framework consistently discovers diverse locomotion strategies that outperform baselines obtained through separated design. The framework is also flexible to accommodate different functional requirements and boundary conditions. Using this framework, we further extract design insights that reveal the individual and collective effects of different entities on robotic performance. The proposed framework provides a computational foundation for the autonomous co-design of robotic systems, capable of reconfiguration, locomotion, and other complex autonomous behaviors. 

Keywords co-design · topology optimization · differentiable simulation · machine learning 

# 1 Introduction 

Robots, and machines more broadly, originate from our aspiration to reproduce the autonomy observed in humans and animals, and ultimately surpass natural capabilities [ 1]. To date, substantial progress has been achieved in several key components of robotic systems, i.e., structure [ 2 ], materials [ 3, 4 ], and control [ 5, 6]. However, autonomous robots remain far less adaptive and diverse compared with their natural counterparts [ 7 ]. While advances in soft robotics and responsive materials have expanded the design space [ 3, 4 ], robot morphologies remain far narrower than the vast diversity found in nature. More fundamentally, structure, materials, and control are often designed separately or sequentially, rather than being co-designed in a tightly coupled manner [ 2 , 5, 8, 9, 10 , 11 ]. For example, a robot structure is typically first specified, after which control strategies are developed to operate the resulting body [ 12 , 13 ]. This contrasts with natural systems, where structure, material, and control strategies coevolve to produce highly diverse and specialized organisms [14]. Motivated by this observation, there is growing interest in exploring whether the co-design can lead to performance improvements and increased diversity in artificial robotic systems [ 15 ]. This interest in co-design is supported by two 

> ∗

Corresponding author 

> arXiv:2605.12654v1 [cs.RO] 12 May 2026

COSMIC A P REPRINT 

considerations. First, from a physical perspective, structure, materials, and control are inherently coupled in system dynamics, producing collective effects that cannot be achieved by each entity independently. Second, from a design perspective, co-design greatly expands the design space[ 16 ], which is more likely to contain a superior optima that is inaccessible to separated design pipelines. Yet, obtaining an optimal solution via co-design remains challenging in practice. First, the design of different entities often requires variables of different types, leading to a massive and sometimes combinatorial design space. Second, evaluating a robot’s dynamic performance is difficult and computationally expensive, involving contacts, friction, large deformations, and nonlinear material behavior[ 17 , 18 ]. This often requires small integration steps over long time horizons, making exhaustive searches prohibitively costly. Although advanced evolutionary algorithms [16 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 ] and dimensionality-reduction techniques [ 24 , 25 ] enable more effective search, they still require large populations and many iterations to converge. Third, the physical coupling across design entities makes the underlying optimization problem highly non-convex, even discontinuous; for instance, small changes to structure may lead to large and unpredictable changes in performance. Consequently, comprehensive co-design has mainly been demonstrated for quasi-static systems, such as shape-morphing material networks [ 26 ], kirigami [ 27 ], and granular matter [28], which are computationally cheaper to evaluate with smoother objectives. Recent pioneering efforts have begun extending co-design to dynamic systems[ 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 ]. In particular, GPU-parallel physics solvers dramatically accelerate evaluations [ 34 , 35 ], while auto-differentiation [ 36 , 37 ] enables efficient calculation of gradients over long temporal horizons for design variables, even in the presence of discontinuous contacts. These advances have enabled a range of frameworks that achieve co-design using gradient-based optimization, drastically reducing the number of simulations compared with exhaustive or heuristic optimizers [ 15 , 32 , 38 , 39 , 40 ]. Many of these approaches focus on continuum soft robots[ 30 , 41 , 42 , 23 ], which allow continuous variations in structures and materials and therefore enable stable optimization[ 8, 39 ]. In contrast, co-design of discrete robotic systems remains relatively limited. Their discrete nature introduces mixed-variable design space, sharp discontinuities, and severe nonconvexity in the optimization landscape, making gradient-based co-design more challenging[ 43 ]. Yet such systems have many important applications, including legged robots [ 44 , 45 ], tensegrity structures [ 46 , 47 ], and bio-hybrid robots [ 48 , 49 ]. Therefore, despite these pioneering efforts, there remains a need for comprehensive gradient-based platforms that enable the co-design of structure, materials, and control, particularly for discrete robotic systems. Furthermore, we still lack a clear understanding of the individual and collective contributions of different design entities to the system-level performance [42, 50]. In this work, we propose a framework that co-designs the structure, material layout, and control of a discrete truss-lattice robot (Fig. 1). We begin by constructing a unified spatial-temporal design space, merging structure and material selections with control neural network training (Fig. 1a). We then develop a GPU-enabled differentiable dynamic simulation to quantify system performance and sensitivity (Fig. 1b). We integrate the representation and differentiable evaluation into a constrained optimization to iteratively and concurrently update all design entities (Fig. 1c). The framework is demonstrated for a range of dynamic tasks, uncovering valuable knowledge on the effects of co-design entities (Fig. 1d). Our proposed framework has the following contributions: • We introduce a continuous, differentiable design representation that unifies spatial topological, discrete material selection, and spatiotemporal neural control in a discrete robot, enabling the use of efficient gradient-based optimization. • We develop a GPU-parallel differentiable simulator that captures the physical interdependency among design entities and their environment, efficiently evaluating dynamics in contact-rich scenarios while providing gradient information through automatic differentiation. • We propose a constrained optimization method that jointly designs structure, materials, and control to automate dynamic robot design. The method incorporates mechanisms to ensure structural integrity and physical feasibility, and automatically generates robotic designs for customized tasks that outperform conventional separate design strategies. • We uncover important design insights by revealing the individual and collective effects of structures, materials, and control on system-level performance. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. We first detail the proposed co-design framework (Section 2), and then demonstrate its effectiveness against baselines (Section 3.1). Next, we employ an ablation study to investigate the individual and collective contributions of design entities (Section 3.2). Finally, we demonstrate the generalizability of the framework across different objectives, physical environments, and design spaces (Section 3.3). Conclusions are drawn in Section 4. 2COSMIC A P REPRINT 

Figure 1: Overview of the dynamic co-design platform 

# 2 Method 

In this section, we develop a general co-design framework for dynamic robotic systems. We consider a lattice robot composed of truss elements, where each truss can function either as a passive skeleton or as an externally controlled actuator. Our goal is to co-design the topology, the spatial distribution of material types, and the temporal control signals for each actuator to maximize dynamic performance. To achieve this, we extend topology optimization to integrate a mixed-variable design representation, a differentiable dynamic simulation for design evaluation, and a constrained optimization for design synthesis. 

2.1 Design Representation 2.1.1 Topology and Material Layout 

Consider a lattice robot composed of truss elements connected at mass nodes, as shown in Fig. 2. The structure can be represented as a graph with Nm nodes and Ne edges Eij , where each edge connects node i and node j. The set of all connected node pairs is denoted by E = {(i, j )}. Each edge can take one of three possible states: void, skeleton, and actuator. To represent this edge-wise design choice, we associate each edge Eij with a three-dimensional one-hot vector zij = [ zij, 1, z ij, 2, z ij, 3]⊤ ∈ { 0, 1}3, where the three entries correspond to the states void, skeleton, and actuator, respectively (Figure 2c). When an edge is assigned a specific state, the corresponding entry equals one while the others are zero. This discrete representation poses challenges for gradient-based optimization. Therefore, we relax the design variable to a continuous vector zij ∈ [0 , 1] 3 (Figure 2a) and project it to a normalized material state vector ˜zij using a scaled softmax function that approximates the original one-hot encoding: 

˜zij,k = exp( βz ij,k )

P3 

> l=1

exp( βz ij,l ) , (1) where β is a scaling factor to control the projection sharpness, as shown in Figure 2b. To further promote binarization, we introduce an explicit binarization constraint in the optimization problem (Section. 2.3), which can adaptively penalize intermediate values to drive the design variables toward one-hot encodings that correspond to discrete material states. 3COSMIC A P REPRINT 

Figure 2: Design representation: (a) Each edge Eij is associated with a continuous, relaxed design vector zij . (b) Through a softmax projection scaled by β, (c) we project it to a one-hot-encoded material state vector ˜zij , that dictates the mix ratio between discrete material types. (d) The Multi-Layer Perceptron controller receives synchronized clock signals from a Central Pattern Generator, the instantaneous nodal positional offsets and velocity, and a 2D goal vector to (e) output a control signal for each edge uij (t) ∈ [−1, 1] . (f) The control signal is scaled by edge material properties, including amax and ˜zij, 3 to yield the target strain for each edge at time t, ϵtarget ,ij (t). Notice how only edges with the actuator material state have non-zero target strain. To interface with the physical simulation, each material state is associated with H mechanical properties, stored in a material property library matrix Ψ ∈ RNe×H . The effective property vector pij ∈ RH for truss Eij is computed via matrix multiplication: 

pij = Ψ ⊤zij , (2) where the entries of pij dictate the interpolated mechanical properties (e.g., stiffness, density) to be used in simulation. In this study, we consider H = 3 properties in the property matrix Ψ, including the stiffness ( k ), linear density ( ρ), and maximum actuation strain ( amax ). Each material state is characterized by a distinct combination of these properties: • Void ( V ): has ultra-low stiffness, ultra-low linear density, and zero actuation capability. Trusses assigned to this state effectively act as a void to allow topological changes. • Skeleton ( S): has high stiffness, medium density, and zero actuation capability. It mainly provides the structural support of the robot. Its high stiffness allows it to passively resist deformation, upholding the structural integrity vital for the stability of a discrete lattice. • Actuator ( A): has a stiffness an order of magnitude lower than the skeleton, and a linear density three times as high (mirroring the heavy weight of real-world electromechanical components). While compliant and heavy, it possesses high actuation capabilities. This property scheme reflects the inherent trade-off observed in natural and artificial systems, where a truss cannot simultaneously possess high stiffness and high actuation capacity. Therefore, to maximize performance within a limited materials constraint, it requires a highly strategic, synergistic allocation of passive skeleton and active actuation. Finally, to accelerate the simulation, we lump the mass of the trusses at the connecting nodes. The mass mi of node i is computed as: 

mi = mϵ + 12

X 

> j∈N (i)

lij 

> 3

X

> k=1

˜zij,k ρk, (3) where N (i) denotes the set of nodes connected to node i, lij is the resting length of edge Eij , and ρk is the linear density associated with material state k. To maintain numerical stability and prevent singularities during the physics 4COSMIC A P REPRINT 

simulation, every node is initialized with a negligible baseline mass mϵ. Consequently, nodes connected exclusively to void trusses act as negligible masses, naturally eliminating themselves from the system dynamics. The head node i = 0 

is instantiated with a larger weight, acting as a payload to be carried forth by the robot. 

2.1.2 Actuation Control 

The dynamic actuation of the robot is governed by a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) neural network, as shown in Figure 2d. The MLP processes the instantaneous kinematic state of the robot alongside a synchronized clock signal to output a target actuation length for each truss. Specifically, the network input vector I(t) at time t consists of Central Pattern Generator (CPG) signals [ 51 ], nodal positional offsets, nodal velocity vectors, and a goal position vector. The CPG signals C(t) ∈ RNCPG are modeled as phase-shifted sine waves to ensure all active trusses actuate in a synchronized, periodic manner: 

Cj (t) = sin 



ωt + 2πj NCPG 



, j ∈ { 0, . . . , N CPG − 1} (4) Let the position vector of node i be defined as xi(t) = [ xi(t), y i(t)] ⊤. The positional offsets are thus ∆xi(t), which provide spatial awareness by tracking the displacement of each node i ∈ M relative to the geometric center of the robot: 

∆xi(t) = xi(t) − 1

NmNmX

> j=1

xj (t) (5) Additionally, we define a 2D goal vector xgoal ∈ R2 that specifies the desired target coordinates for the robot’s locomotion. By concatenating these features, we obtain the complete input vector: 

I(t) = C(t)⊤, xgoal , ∆x1(t)⊤, . . . , ∆xNm (t)⊤, v1(t)⊤, . . . , vNm (t)⊤⊤ (6) While the CPG provides the fundamental gait frequency, positional and velocity information allows the control policy to be modulated by the gait cycle’s current stage, helping it react to environmental perturbations by sensing velocity changes. Further, the inclusion of the goal vector enabled active steering toward different spatial targets. The MLP comprises a single hidden layer with a bias vector, followed by an output layer of dimension Ne, i.e., the total number of edges. We utilize a hyperbolic tangent ( tanh ) activation function to bound the network outputs 

uij (t) ∈ [−1, 1] , where 1 denotes maximum extension and −1 denotes maximum contraction (Figure 2e). While the control neural network outputs signals for all edges, only those edges assigned to the actuator state physically respond. To enforce this, we modulate the raw MLP outputs based on edge-wise material state vector to obtain the effective target strain ϵtarget ,ij (t) as: 

ϵtarget ,ij (t) = ˜ zij, 3 · amax · uij (t), (7) where ˜zij, 3 is the assigned ratio of Actuator for truss Eij . This way, only trusses in actuator states will receive a target strain (Figure 2d). 

2.2 Design Evaluation 

We further couple the proposed design representation with differentiable simulators to evaluate the system performance. We assume truss forces are governed by a generalized Hooke’s law, with stiffness and actuation properties computed in Eq. 2. For example, the effective stiffness kij of truss Eij is computed as the dot product of its material state vector and the stiffness values associated with each state: k ij = ˜ zij, 1k1 + ˜ zij, 2k2 + ˜ zij, 3k3.The target actuation length of the truss is determined dynamically by the target strain ϵtarget ,ij (t) generated by the MLP controller: 

ltarget ,ij (t) = l0,ij [1 + ϵtarget ,ij (t)] , (8) where l0,ij is the original length of the truss without actuation, as shown in Figure 3a. The internal scalar forces can then be calculated by Hooke’s law: 

Fij (t) = kij [lij (t) − ltarget ,ij (t)] (9) Intuitively, a larger commanded target strain magnitude results in a greater difference between the current length and the target length, thereby producing a larger internal force in the truss. To simulate the system dynamics, we integrate the force over the simulation time step ∆t and transfer it to the connecting nodes i and j as a nodal impulse. Specifically, for the nodal force imposed on node i from the truss Eij :

Jj→i(t) = Fij (t) · ∆t · uij (t), (10) 5COSMIC A P REPRINT 

Figure 3: Illustration of the differentiable simulation. At integration time t, (a) a generalized Hooke’s law is used to determine the force produced by edge Eij from its target actuation length ltarget ,ij (t) and current length lij (t). (b) The pre-collision velocity vector v∗ 

> i

(t) is calculated from the resultant aggregated force on node i to update the nodal position xi(t + ∆ t). (c) The position and velocity of nodes that penetrate the ground are modified using Time Of Impact (TOI) techniques. At TOI, we compute a post-collision velocity vector v+ 

> i

(t) by applying frictional damping to the pre-collision tangential component, and eliminating the perpendicular component. (d) Final nodal positions are obtained, advancing the simulation to the next step t + ∆ t, completing a forward simulation. Gradients are computed by propagating backwards in the computational graph (dashed arrows). where uij (t) = xj (t)−xi(t)  

> lij (t)

is the unit directional vector pointing from node i to node j. We then aggregated all nodal impulses to update the nodal position. To simulate atmospheric drag and internal energy dissipation, we also apply an exponential frictional damping decay to the nodal velocities. The nodal location and velocity vi for node i is updated via symplectic Euler integration: 

vi(t + ∆ t) = exp( −γ∆t)vi(t) + 1

mi

X 

> j∈N (i)

Jj→i(t) + g∆t, 

xi(t + ∆ t) = xi(t) + vi(t + ∆ t)∆ t, 

(11) where γ is the damping coefficient and g is the gravity vector (Figure 3b). To handle the contact with the ground, we use a high-fidelity Time of Impact (TOI) scheme to prevent interpenetration and reduce gradient discontinuity [ 35 ]. Upon ground contact detection, the exact TOI τ ∈ [0 , ∆t] is linearly interpolated from the pre-collision trajectory (Figure 3c). When considering an infinite friction scenario, a zero-velocity boundary condition is applied at the contact point. When Coulomb friction is considered, the collision is modeled as perfectly inelastic in the normal (vertical) direction, while the tangential (horizontal) velocity is penalized by the coefficient of dynamic friction μ:

v+ 

> i,y

(t) = 0 

v+

> i,x

(t) = 

0, if infinite friction 

v∗

> i,x

(t) − μ|v∗ 

> i,y

(t)|sgn (v∗

> i,x

(t)) , if Coulomb (12) where v∗ 

> i

(t) and v+ 

> i

(t) denote the pre-collision and post-collision velocities, respectively, and μ is the coefficient of dynamic friction. Note that this velocity modification will be imposed before updating the nodal position in Eq. 11. By iteratively applying this update rule, we obtain the full motion trajectory of the robot through forward simulation (Figure 3). The resulting procedure also defines a forward computational graph, which allows automatic differentiation to backpropagate the sensitivity of the nodal displacement at the final state through all integration time steps to the design variables and weights of control networks. This yields the gradients required to update the design variables and control weights. 6COSMIC A P REPRINT 

Figure 4: Penalty fields of (a) the global binarization constraint, (b) the pairwise orthogonal constraint, and (c) the combined penalty constraint with the optimization trajectory of design vectors throughout iterations. The three corners of each ternary plot represent discrete states, while the interior indicates intermediate interpolations between them. (d) Circled in white: an edge that struggles to decide between actuator and void, but converges towards actuator, facilitated by the iterative attraction phase. (e) Circled in yellow: zigzag design vector trajectories due to the competition between displacement and stability objectives. 

2.3 Design Optimization 

While the proposed framework is flexible enough to accommodate various functional objectives, we focus on forward locomotion in this study where the goal is to maximize the traveled distance. The co-design problem is formulated as a joint optimization over the structural state variables Z = {zij } and the neural network controller parameters θ. The objective is defined as the negative forward displacement of the payload head node (index 0) at the final rollout timestep 

T :

min  

> Z,θ

Ldisp (Z, θ) = −x0(T ) (13) To obtain feasible solutions, we introduce additional constraints to the optimization problem and incorporate structural stability checks when solving the problem, as described in the following. 

2.3.1 Constraints 

We impose two main categories of constraints: volume fraction constraints and binarization constraints. First, we enforce volume fraction constraints on different material states. The total solid volume fraction V (including both actuator and skeleton) and the actuator volume fraction Vact are computed as 

V = 1

Ne

X

> (i,j )∈E

(pij, 2 + pij, 3), Vact = 1

Ne

X

> (i,j )∈E

pij, 3 (14) These scalar volume fractions are required to satisfy the prescribed bounds (V max , V min ) and (V max  

> act

, V min  

> act

), respec-tively. To provide mobility for intermediate material states ( ˜zij,k /∈ { 0, 1}) that struggle to satisfy competing objectives, we progressively relax these bounds up to a small tolerance ∆V . This way, task performance will be prioritized over a strictly satisfied volume bound, which may damage physical stability. Consequently, the effective bounds become 

V max ∗ = V max + ∆ V , V min ∗ = V min − ∆V , and similarly for the actuator volume. Second, we impose binarization constraints on the material state vectors to ensure they eventually achieve a fully discretized state, i.e., ˜zij,k ∈ { 0, 1} (Fig. 4). This is accomplished through a global binarization penalty gbin that drives the L2 norm of the material state vector toward 1 [ 39 ], and a pairwise orthogonal penalty gortho that minimizes the overlap between entries corresponding to any two distinct material types: 

gbin = 1

Ne

X

> (i,j )∈E

1 −

vuut 3X

> k=1

˜z2

> ij,k

 , (15) 7COSMIC A P REPRINT 

gortho = 1

Ne

X

> (i,j )∈E

X 

> k̸=l

˜zij,k ˜zij,l 

0.5(˜ zij,k + ˜ zij,l ) + δ , (16) where δ is a small value to avoid singularity. These penalty values should be controlled within a given acceptable range. Note that in standard density-based topology optimization, methods like Solid Isotropic Material with Penalization (SIMP) are frequently used to penalize the stiffness of intermediate probabilities, driving the optimizer toward discrete solutions [ 52 ]. However, due to the extreme non-convexity of the optimization landscape for discrete truss robots, such penalization can induce significant instability in the system dynamics, as observed in our preliminary tests. This motivates our use of the binarization constraints described above, which adaptively guide the solution toward discrete states over time. 

2.3.2 Optimization Problem and Solution 

With the above constraints, our goal is to find the optimal combination of the material design vectors Z = {zij } and the neural network weights θ that maximizes the locomotion distance. This co-design problem can be formulated as a constrained optimization: 

min  

> Z,θ

Ldisp (Z, θ)

subject to V min ∗ ≤ V (Z) ≤ V max ∗,V min ∗ 

> act

≤ Vact (Z) ≤ V max ∗ 

> act

,gbin (Z) ≤ g∗

> bin

,gortho (Z) ≤ g∗

> ortho

,

(17) where g∗ 

> bin

and g∗ 

> ortho

represent the acceptable threshold for the binarization and pairwise orthogonal constraints, respectively. We solve this constrained problem via iterative gradient-based optimization. To promote the initial exploration of vast design possibilities, binarization constraints are enforced through the Augmented Lagrangian (AL) method [ 39 , 53 ]. Unlike volume fraction constraints, which are strictly enforced at all times, binarization constraints are allowed to be occasionally violated to increase the exploration of discrete choices and open up potential pathways to better solutions. The AL method provides a rigorous mechanism to adaptively adjust the penalization strength to achieve this. Empirically, we find this approach yields better performance compared with strictly enforcing the constraints. The objective function with AL constraints is defined as: 

L(Z, λ, τ ) = Ldisp +

> 4

X

> k=1



−λkvk + 12 τkv2

> k



, (18) where vk denotes the violation magnitude of the k-th binarization constraint (one global L2 penalty and three pairwise orthogonal penalties). The Lagrangian multipliers λ are updated dynamically at each iteration according to λk ←

λk − τkvk. To prevent over-penalization, the penalty weight τk is increased by a factor of a if the constraint violation 

vk increases between iterations, and decreased by 1/a if the violation decreases. All material design vectors Z are initialized uniformly and updated iteratively via the Method of Moving Asymptotes (MMA). The MMA optimizer takes in the augmented objective L(Z, λ, τ ), the volume fraction constraints, and gradients from the differentiable simulation. The MLP controller weights θ are initialized using Xavier Initialization and updated using the Adam optimizer, which represents the state-of-the-art for gradient-based optimization over large parameter sets in neural networks. Material design vectors and MLP weights are updated alternately at a 3:2 ratio, based on our preliminary experiments, to enable a balanced update between robot morphology and control, supporting optimal co-evolution of the configuration. Despite the binarization constraint penalization, in practice, some edges can still become trapped in intermediate material states in the optimization (Fig. 4e). In these cases, the dynamic system relies on a delicate structural integrity and balance that is maintained by these physically infeasible intermediate materials. Once these materials are removed, the delicate balance may be disrupted, potentially causing collapse of the structure or disjoint geometry, which can drastically alter the system dynamics. Consequently, performance losses evaluated on intermediate designs rarely reflect the true performance of the final discrete robot. To reliably probe the structural integrity of the final discrete robot, we propose to implement an auxiliary stability evaluation along with the ordinary objective function evaluation. This pass implements a globally centered softmax 8COSMIC A P REPRINT 

Figure 5: Optimization history of the co-design process corresponding to the design in Figure. 6b. (a–d) Intermediate designs at iterations 20, 70, 110, and 200, respectively, showing the evolution of the structure. (d) Structural fine-tuning during the design vector attraction stage. (e) Fully binarized and frozen structural layout in the control-only design stage, where only the MLP controller weights are fine-tuned. function to project the continuous design variables z into a highly sharpened proxy geometry z∗ using a scaling factor 

βstab much higher than the β we use in Eq. 1: 

¯zk = 1

Ne

X

> (i,j )∈E

zij,k (19) 

z∗ 

> ij,k

= exp( βstab (zij,k − ¯zk)) 

P3 

> l=1

exp( βstab (zij,l − ¯zl)) (20) This globally centered projection serves as a high-fidelity proxy of the final discrete geometry, operating on the assumption that design vectors will linearly diverge from the global mean under continuous binarization pressure. The moving displacement of this proxy design is evaluated and used as an auxiliary objective function Lstab = −x0(T ),which we term a stability pass , in contrast to the ordinary objective evaluation with β, referred to as a performance pass .During optimization, stability passes are interleaved with performance passes, and the resulting design variable updates are blended according to a predefined ratio. However, the aggressive sharpening induced by βstab can lead to severe vanishing gradients. To mitigate this, we adopt a Straight-Through Estimator (STE) to compute the gradient in a more reliable way [54]. To accelerate convergence during the later stages of optimization, where the continuous material design vectors zij 

exhibit reduced mobility due to smaller gradients (Fig. 4d), we implement a iterative vector attraction phase (Fig. 5). If the maximum value of a material state vector ˜zij exceeds a confidence threshold τ , we deem the largest entry as the dominant state. The design vector is progressively pulled toward its dominant discrete material state using an additive nudge γ:

zij,c ∗ ← zij,c ∗ + γ, zij,k ← zij,k − γN − 1 for k̸ = c∗, (21) where c∗ is the index of the dominant material state. 9COSMIC A P REPRINT 

Both the confidence threshold τ and the nudge strength γ are linearly annealed over time. A hard discretization snap is enforced toward the end of the optimization process, after which the strictly binarized topology and material layout are frozen, and the neural controller parameters θ are fine-tuned alone for the remaining iterations (Fig. 5). 

Algorithm 1 Multi-Stage Co-Design Optimization  

> 1:

Input: Initial design vectors Z ∈ RNe×3, MLP θ, Hyper-parameters.  

> 2:

Output: Discrete design Z∗, fine-tuned controller θ∗. 

> 3:

Init. multipliers λ ← 0, penalties τ ← τ0. 

> 4:

for Iter = 1 to 300 do  

> 5:

Interpolate Tgrad and volume tolerance ∆V . 

> 6:

Alternate passes ∈ { Controller, Performance, Stability }. 

> 7:

if Iter < 240 then ▷ Phase: Co-design  

> 8:

Project Z → ˜Z via softmax β (Eq. 1).  

> 9:

Simulate dynamics for T steps (Eq. 8–12).  

> 10:

Compute Ldisp = −x0(T ) and constraints vk. 

> 11:

if Controller pass then  

> 12:

Update θ via Adam w.r.t. Ldisp . 

> 13:

else if Performance pass then  

> 14:

Update Z via MMA w.r.t. AL obj. (Eq. 17).  

> 15:

else if Stability pass then  

> 16:

Project proxy Z∗ via centered softmax βstab . 

> 17:

Compute Lstab & update Z via STE + MMA.  

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

Update AL params λ, τ using violations vk. 

> 20:

if Iter ≥ 170 then ▷ Phase: Iterative Attraction  

> 21:

Apply iterative attraction(Eq. 21).  

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

else if Iter == 240 then ▷ Phase: Fine-tune  

> 24:

Snap Z to {0, 1}3 one-hot encodings.  

> 25:

Freeze layout: Z∗ ← Z. 

> 26:

else  

> 27:

Simulate dynamics using frozen geometry Z∗. 

> 28:

Update only θ via Adam w.r.t. Ldisp . 

> 29:

end if  

> 30:

end for  

> 31:

return Z∗, θ∗

2.3.3 Implementation Details 

The following hyperparameters are chosen based on preliminary experiments. In this study, the physical simulation is evaluated for up to 300 design iterations. Each rollout integrates 8192 timesteps of ∆t = 0 .002 s using a symplectic first-order Euler method in a differentiable simulation platform, Taichi, as described in Section 2.2. To preserve dynamic fidelity while accelerating convergence, gradients are initially calculated for only 2048 timesteps, and are gradually extended to a maximum of 4096 timesteps between iterations 80 and 150. The volume bound tolerance ∆V is linearly widened from zero to 0.03 between iterations 110 and 150. Iterative vector attraction begins at iteration 170, followed by a hard discretization snap at iteration 240. The neural controller is then fine-tuned on the strictly binarized topology for the remaining iterations (240–300). The complete pseudo-code implementation is shown in Algorithm 1. We select NCPG = 10 CPG signals and a fundamental frequency of ω = 10 following [ 35 ]. Furthermore, we found that utilizing more than 10 CPG signals tends to desynchronize the robot’s movement and harm overall locomotion stability. Similarly, to ensure the controller remains lightweight and stable during the highly non-convex co-design process, we adopt a hidden layer dimension of 32. The final MLP has layer widths of (NCP G + 4 Nm + 2 , D hidden , N e) = (156 , 32 , 110) .The specific material properties assigned to the void, skeleton, and actuator states are summarized in Table 1. Hyperpa-rameters for the constraints, Augmented Lagrangian penalties, and optimization solver are listed in Table 2. 10 COSMIC A P REPRINT 

Table 1: Material properties assigned to the three discrete states. Material State k (N/m) ρ (g/m) amax 

Void ( V ) 1 × 10 −7 1 × 10 −5 0.0

Skeleton ( S) 4 × 10 2 30 .0 0.0

Actuator ( A) 3 × 10 1 100 .0 0.35 

Table 2: Hyperparameters for simulation and optimization. Parameter Symbol Value Integration time step ∆t 0.002 sTotal rollout steps T 8192 

Max topology volume fraction V max 0.50 

Min topology volume fraction V min 0.50 

Min actuator volume fraction V min  

> act

0.20 

Max actuator volume fraction V max  

> act

0.22 

AL initial penalty weight τ0 0.3

AL penalty annealing factor a 1.01 

Performance pass inverse temp. β 20 .0

Stability pass inverse temp. βstab 500 .0

STE inverse temp. βSTE 20 .0

# 3 Results and Discussion 

3.1 Effect of Design Initialization 

We first investigate whether the proposed platform can effectively navigate the mixed-variable design space to discover optimal configurations of topology, material layout, and control. Furthermore, we verify whether co-design yields improved dynamic performance by comparing our method against a baseline that designs configuration and control separately, under identical volume fraction constraints. We adapt the baseline design (Figure 6a) from [ 35 ], which features a three-legged topology with vertically actuated active trusses and passive cross-braces to resist gravity. This configuration follows standard heuristics for walking robots, with three limbs to support an alternating gait. Additionally, it serves as the sequential design baseline where the pre-designed structural and material distributions are first fixed, then followed by the optimization of the neural network controller with Xavier-initialized weights. To provide a non-zero initial gradient, the payload node (bottom-left) is offset to x = 0 .1 m for all robots. The target positional vector is set to (2 , 0.1) m. The baseline robot learns an optimal control policy for its fixed material layout over 200 iterations, achieving a final horizontal displacement of 1.14 m. However, the prevalent passive cross-bracing restricted the stroke magnitude of its limbs, causing inconsistent ground contact dynamics that destabilize its gait during later stages of the rollout, as indicated by the increasing disorderness in the payload trajectory. Next, we compare the baseline to Design 6b, which is fully co-designed using the proposed framework. To ensure a fair comparison, we constrained both robots to the same total topology and actuation volume budgets. Design 6b is initialized using a gentle stability heuristic: trusses are assigned an initial ratio bias toward the void state proportional to their vertical elevation (y-height), with the topmost truss receiving a maximum ratio shift of ∆˜ zij, 0 = +12% . The stability heuristic is aimed at preventing structural collapse, commonly caused by sparse, top-heavy geometries or large, unsupported active clusters. By promoting dense, low center of mass structures, this heuristic narrows the design space to favor solutions better suited for dynamic stability. The optimization trajectory of each edge design vector is visualized in Figure 4, and the corresponding structural evolution of the entire robot is shown in Figure 5. Upon initialization, all truss design vectors lie in intermediate states. As the optimization proceeds, most design vectors migrate rapidly and smoothly toward discrete states within 150 iterations under the Augmented Lagrangian binarization penalty (Figures 4c). Volume fraction constraints encourage the solver to better allocate actuators and structural elements, leading to a significant decrease in the objective function and a corresponding improvement in the walking distance (Figure 5a–c). Meanwhile, some trusses struggle to converge to a single material state (Figures 4d and 5c). These intermediate trusses are addressed in a second stage, where we introduce the progressive nudge of the iterative attraction phase to achieve binarization (Figure 5d). During this process, those trusses gradually resolve the competition between 11 COSMIC A P REPRINT 

Figure 6: The baseline and optimization results with varying initial designs. (a) Vertical actuation layout baseline without optimization. (b)-(d) Optimization results from different initial heuristics: (b) Stability heuristic : top springs receive a higher void ratio. (c) Three-legged heuristic: shaded region receives a higher void ratio. (d) No heuristics. The target position is marked by a vertical dashed line. Payload node’s trajectories and final horizontal displacements of the robot are plotted in green, while instantaneous actuator strains are visualized with red denoting extension and blue denoting contraction. performance and stability objectives, indicative in their zigzagging trajectories (Figure 4e). Ultimately, the design achieves full convergence before the hard binarization snap (Figure 5e), with additional iterations devoted to further control optimization. The final converged morphology for Design 6b adopts a propulsive leaping gait, relying primarily on a massive back leg for thrust while utilizing a smaller front leg for traction. This co-designed robot achieves a final displacement of 1.90 m, outperforming the sequential baseline by 66%. However, the notable performance improvement demonstrated by 6b could be simply attributed to a superior initial heuristic compared with the baseline. To test this possibility, we introduce a different initial solution in Design 6c that mirrors the three-legged configuration of the baseline, allowing us to examine whether co-design can consistently improve locomotion performance across alternative initializations. Here, trusses that are void in the baseline (Design 6a) are initialized with a strong bias toward the void state, while all remaining active and skeletal trusses start with completely uniform and equal ratios for each state. During optimization, Design 6c concentrates its actuators within the middle leg (Figure 6c). This allocation overcomes the restricted stroke observed in the baseline, enabling sweeping motions and lengthened strides to achieve a final displacement of 1.87 m. This result falls slightly short of Design 6b, indicating that the performance indeed depends on initialization, as expected for such a nonconvex optimization problem. However, it still substantially outperforms the baseline that shares the same three-legged initial configuration. This result highlights the advantage of co-design over separated design. Finally, we verify that even for the most challenging scenario, a heuristics-free initialization (Figure 6d), the proposed platform can still find a viable solution. Here, optimization begins with completely uniform material ratios for the void, skeleton, and actuator states across all trusses. The algorithm receives no initial guidance and is forced to search for a structurally valid and dynamically favorable solution from an unrestricted design space. Despite this lack of guidance, the co-design platform is still able to discover a viable design that achieves a travel distance of 0.98m. The resulting Design 6d adopts a hopping gait: using its front leg as support and frugally allocating the highly compliant muscle near the back leg payload for motion. Although the heuristic-free optimization succeeds in finding a valid locomotion strategy, it still underperforms relative to Designs 6b and 6c, as we intend to choose a challenging initial solution to test optimization sensitivity. Future gradient-based co-design approaches could be combined with global search methods, such as genetic algorithms, to seed the solver with strong initial solutions. Interestingly, Design 6d automatically discovered structural features similar to the stability-heuristics Design 6b despite receiving no guidance. 12 COSMIC A P REPRINT 

Figure 7: Combinatorial ablation study results. Robots are optimized from an identical initialization. A cross mark indicates a disabled design entity, while a tick mark indicates indicates an enabled entity. Common emergent features include disconnecting specific bottom trusses for larger strides, and concentrating topology to the lower half for a low center of gravity. 

3.2 Individual and Collective Contribution of Design Entities 

We continue to leverage our platform to investigate the individual and collective contributions of design entities to locomotive performance. We conduct ablation studies by selectively disabling specific entities, allowing us to isolate their individual effects or examine pairwise combinations. We then compare these ablated trials with the fully co-designed case to quantify the benefits of jointly optimizing all three design entities. By combinatorially considering the enabled/disabled design of the three design entities, we obtain eight possible design schemes or trials (Figure 7). Specifically, trials with the control design disabled (Designs 7a, c, e, and g) operate using frozen MLP weights from Xavier Initialization. For no-topology-design trials (Designs 7a, b, e, and f), a default fully-filled topology is used, while a uniform distribution of vertical actuators as used the default actuation layout for no-material-design trials (Designs 7a, b, c, and d). The same initialization in Figure 6b is applied to all trials that enable topology design (Designs 7c, d, g, and h). To ensure the topology remains frozen while materials can still be redistributed, Trials 7e and f are subject to a topology volume fraction of V min = 0 .90 , which is only appropriately strict to prevent sharp design vector motions at the simplex edges (as seen in Figure 4c). Conversely, to freeze the material layout while permitting topological changes in Trials 7c and d, we subtract a small constant from the non-dominant solid entries of the design vector before every softmax projection, whereas the void entries are left unaltered to enable topological design. The quantitative results are summarized in Figure 8. Actuation layout demonstrates the largest individual contribution to performance improvement, increasing the average displacement by 781% compared to the "without" conditions (Figure 8b). Admittedly, the default actuator distribution imposes stringent requirements on compatible topologies, which must mechanically facilitate high-stroke motions for traversal. Yet, actively co-designing the actuation layout consistently yields substantial performance improvements regardless of the underlying topology (comparing Trials 7a–d to 7e–h), highlighting its high adaptability to varied initial conditions and its values in robotic design. Topological design produces an improvement of 116% (Figure 8a), while weak on its own, it is a powerful multiplier for the positive impact of material design. By comparing trials optimized with and without topology while holding the other two design entities constant (Trial 7e vs. g, and 7f vs. h), we observe that topological optimization consistently increases traversal distance, even on top of the already substantial gains achieved by actuation design alone. 13 COSMIC A P REPRINT 

Figure 8: Quatitative ablation results. Grouped by design entities, the average with and without performance for each entity is compared. Actuation layout has the largest contribution to improved performance, while control pattern has the smallest. Surprisingly, control pattern design demonstrates a small individual contribution and occasionally impacts performance negatively (Trial 7c vs. d). This behavior likely occurs because the topology and material distribution themselves are suboptimal and provide limited mobility, leaving little room for further improvement through control optimization alone. The degradation may also arise because the severe non-linearities introduced by ground contacts pollute the gradient propagation through time; when coupled with a sub-optimal physical structure, the resulting small loss, and consequently small gradient amplitude, muddies the directional information provided to the Adam optimizer. However, when combined with material layout optimization, control consistently enhances traversal, as observed in Trials 7e vs. f and 7g vs. h. Most notably, when we further incorporate the topology entity, co-evolving control alongside all other entities, travel distance increases by 87% compared to the trial without control optimization (from 1.02 m in Trial 7g to 1.91 m in Trial 7h). This result demonstrates that the benefits of jointly optimizing topology, material distribution, and control exceed those achievable by optimizing the entities in isolation. Additionally, we observe that in trials producing substantial displacement (Designs 7e–h), the resultant material distributions and locomotion strategies are topology-dependent. For example, the fully-filled topologies in Trials 7e and f both allocate actuators heavily to the right and bottom edges of the robot to maximize traction. Conversely, the freely evolved topologies in Trials 7g and h allocate actuators to both the rear and front legs while independently discovering an identical central motif: inserting a horizontal actuator directly between passive cross-braces for enhanced coordination between the front and rear legs. This phenomenon mirrors convergent evolution in nature, where identical musculoskeletal motifs emerge across species with similar body plans. This further highlights the importance of simultaneously optimizing all design entities. Discovering a highly optimized topology without its uniquely compatible actuation layout (Trial 7d vs. h), or vice versa (Trial 7f vs. h), leads to substantially weaker performance. This outcome indicates a strong coupling between material and topology, emphasizing that the two must be jointly designed to enable optimal performance. 

3.3 Generality to Other Tasks and Environments 

Finally, we apply the proposed co-design framework to several additional cases with varying optimization objectives, design space, and environmental parameters to demonstrate its flexibility. All cases begin with the stability heuristics described in Section 3.1. In design 9a, we place the locomotion goal on top of a 15-degree incline. Although sharing the same initialization as Design 6b, the final robot morphology changed in adapting to this new target function. Compared to Design 6b, the 14 COSMIC A P REPRINT 

Figure 9: Alternative tasks and environments: (a) upward incline; (b) 5 × 5 nodes design space; and (c) slippery ground contact. final design 9a evolved to an even slimmer structure to further prioritize a low center of mass, crucial for stabilizing against the toppling forces of the inclined ground boundary. Dynamically, it adopts an arching motion to gain altitude as well as forward distance, that is a combination of hopping (Design 6c) and crawling (Design 6d). Additionally, it slightly undercuts the lower volume bound for topology and actuation in exchange for having to carry less weight upwards, achieving a horizontal distance of 1.36 m and vertical elevation of 0.35 m. For Design 9b, we perform optimization on a smaller design space of 5 × 5 nodal grid, rather than a 6 × 6 nodal grid in all other cases. This reduction in available material resources makes the allocation of materials and topology more critical. Our co-design platform reliably generalizes to this design space and automatically rediscovered the leg division strategy observed in designs Design 6b and d, where the bottom trusses are broken to form a rear and front leg. It used a front-leg assisted leaping gait, primarily relied upon the rear actuators, and achieved a traversal distance of 1.10 m upon final evaluation, comparable to that of Design 6d. Our proposed framework is also flexible enough to handle varying physical and environmental parameters. To demonstrate this capability, we apply it to a locomotion design problem under different ground friction conditions, which strongly influence contact mechanics and locomotion dynamics. Specifically, Design 9c adopts the Coulomb friction contact model specified in Section 2.2, differentiating itself from the infinite friction model used in all other designs. The coefficient of dynamic friction is chosen as μ = 2 .5 [ 55 ]. Under this setting, it exhibits a consistent morphological adaptation to the new physical environment, adopting a locomotion strategy unobserved in previous designs. Instead of dynamically lifting the payload and repositioning it forward with every gait, as observed in Designs 7g and h with similar topology, it keeps the heavy payload with the ground to provide anchorage against skidding. Interestingly, during the first 0.5 meters, the robot folds its front leg inward, increasing the contact area and effectively using it as a friction pad. This behavior represents a beneficial morphological transformation that leverages the coupled effects of environmental physics, topology, material layout, and actuation control. 

# 4 Conclusion 

In this work, we have developed a co-design framework to automatically identify the optimal combination of topological layout, distribution of passive and active materials, and control policy of a discrete truss-lattice robot, maximizing its performance across a range of dynamic locomotive tasks. Within this framework, we construct a unified design representation that links mixed variable structural and material design with a spatiotemporal neural network controller. This formulation allows different design entities to be coupled within a differentiable physics simulator that efficiently evaluates system dynamics and provides gradient information, even under frictional contacts and varying environments. Unlike most existing methods that treat these design entities separately, our approach optimizes them jointly within 15 COSMIC A P REPRINT 

a constrained optimization framework that accounts for structural stability and physical feasibility, providing greater flexibility to achieve improved performance. Through a variety of design cases, we demonstrate that the proposed framework reliably discovers high-performance solutions even without heuristic guidance. With only simple initialization, it can outperform carefully crafted baseline designs developed through sequential design processes. Across tasks, the framework identifies diverse material allocations and locomotion strategies for the same traversal objective, such as leaping, sweeping, and hopping gaits, indicating that co-design expands the accessible morphological design space and enables not only higher performance solutions but also a broader range of viable designs. The framework also adapts to different design requirements and environmental conditions, automatically generating robots whose structures, material distributions, and control policies are tailored to specific tasks to produce effective motion patterns. These results highlight both the adaptability of the proposed method and the importance of co-design for enabling niche robotic systems that accommodate the specific requirements of customized applications. Further, this study uncovers the contributions of structural, material, and control design entities in robotic locomotion. We found that material layout plays the most critical role, as redistributing actuation within a given configuration can effectively reshape robot dynamics and achieve strong performance even when the structure and control are suboptimal. In contrast, control alone cannot compensate for limitations in structure or actuation and is largely bounded by the underlying structural and material design. More importantly, the interaction among structure, materials, and control produces performance gains that exceed the contributions of any single component. We also observe convergent structural motifs emerging across designs with similar objectives, suggesting an underlying form-function relationship that arises from the synergy among these design entities. These insights further highlight the importance and value of simultaneous co-design realized in the proposed framework. There are several limitations in this work that motivate future research. First, as expected for highly nonconvex optimization problems, the final performance remains sensitive to initialization. A promising direction is to combine the proposed gradient-based search with global optimization methods, such as evolutionary algorithms [ 5, 21 ], to improve exploration. Second, as an exploratory study, we employ a simplified simulator. Although the corresponding physical system has recently been realized with good agreement to simulation [ 22 ], incorporating richer physical effects such as bending and material nonlinearities would further improve fidelity. In addition, while we currently optimize the neural controller using gradient-based methods, integrating reinforcement learning strategies may provide greater generalization. Finally, accounting for manufacturing variability and environmental uncertainty will be important for enabling more robust robotic designs. We envision that the proposed framework can be broadly adopted to establish design principles and develop computa-tional tools for a wide range of robotic systems. By customizing each component, the approach is generalizable and applicable to diverse materials and stimuli. We anticipate that it will accelerate the development of robotic material systems with various applications, including bio-hybrid robots [ 48 , 56 ], mechanical computing systems[ 57 , 58 ], and more. 

# Acknowledgments 

We acknowledge support from the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University. 

# References 

[1] Katherine Fu, Diana Moreno, Maria Yang, and Kristin L. Wood. Bio-Inspired Design: An Overview Investigating Open Questions From the Broader Field of Design-by-Analogy. Journal of Mechanical Design , 136(111102), October 2014. [2] Beijia Zhang, Jie Shen, Zhenyu He, Qingyue Wu, Jing Xiong, and Zeyang Xia. Morphological design methodolo-gies of soft robots. The Innovation Informatics , 1(1):100012, 2025. [3] Arda Kotikian, Ryan L. Truby, John William Boley, Timothy J. White, and Jennifer A. Lewis. 3D Printing of Liquid Crystal Elastomeric Actuators with Spatially Programed Nematic Order. Advanced Materials , 30(10):1706164, 2018. [4] Chao Zhang, Xiaofeng Yin, Rongchu Chen, Kaiwen Ju, Yinxuan Hao, Tong Wu, Jian Sun, Huxiao Yang, and Yan Xu. A review on reprogrammable bistable structures. Smart materials and structures , 33(9):093001, 2024. [5] Jianzhe Gu, Ziwen Ye, Tucker Rae-Grant, Shuhong Wang, Ding Zhao, Josiah Hester, Victoria A. Webster-Wood, and Lining Yao. Optimization and control of actuator networks in variable geometry truss systems using genetic algorithms. Nature Communications , 16(1):8432, September 2025. 16 COSMIC A P REPRINT 

[6] Jeffrey Aguilar, Tingnan Zhang, Feifei Qian, Mark Kingsbury, Benjamin McInroe, Nicole Mazouchova, Chen Li, Ryan Maladen, Chaohui Gong, Matt Travers, Ross L Hatton, Howie Choset, Paul B Umbanhowar, and Daniel I Goldman. A review on locomotion robophysics: the study of movement at the intersection of robotics, soft matter and dynamical systems. Reports on Progress in Physics , 79(11):110001, sep 2016. [7] Robert Baines, Frank Fish, Josh Bongard, and Rebecca Kramer-Bottiglio. Robots that evolve on demand. Nature Reviews Materials , 9(11):822–835, November 2024. [8] Hiroki Kobayashi, Farzad Gholami, S. Macrae Montgomery, Masato Tanaka, Liang Yue, Changyoung Yuhn, Yuki Sato, Atsushi Kawamoto, H. Jerry Qi, and Tsuyoshi Nomura. Computational synthesis of locomotive soft robots by topology optimization. Science Advances , 10(30):eadn6129, July 2024. [9] David Howard, Agoston E. Eiben, Danielle Frances Kennedy, Jean-Baptiste Mouret, Philip Valencia, and Dave Winkler. Evolving embodied intelligence from materials to machines. Nature Machine Intelligence , 1(1):12–19, January 2019. [10] Adriana Schulz, Cynthia Sung, Andrew Spielberg, Wei Zhao, Robin Cheng, Eitan Grinspun, Daniela Rus, and Wojciech Matusik. Interactive robogami: An end-to-end system for design of robots with ground locomotion. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 36(10):1131–1147, September 2017. [11] Alexander Spinos and Mark Yim. A linking invariant for truss robot motion planning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 7(2):1424–1430, 2022. [12] Yuntao Guan, Zheming Zhuang, Ze Zhang, and Jian S. Dai. Design, Analysis, and Experiment of the Origami Robot Based on Spherical-Linkage Parallel Mechanism. Journal of Mechanical Design , 145(081701), May 2023. [13] Merel van Diepen and Kristina Shea. Co-Design of the Morphology and Actuation of Soft Robots for Locomotion. 

Journal of Mechanical Design , 144(083305), June 2022. [14] Rinaldo C. Bertossa. Morphology and behaviour: functional links in development and evolution. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 366(1574):2056–2068, July 2011. [15] David Matthews, Andrew Spielberg, Daniela Rus, Sam Kriegman, and Josh Bongard. Efficient automatic design of robots. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 120(41):e2305180120, October 2023. [16] Muhan Li, Lingji Kong, and Sam Kriegman. Generating freeform endoskeletal robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01036 , 2024. [17] Costanza Armanini, Frédéric Boyer, Anup Teejo Mathew, Christian Duriez, and Federico Renda. Soft robots modeling: A structured overview. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 39(3):1728–1748, 2023. [18] Prabhat Kumar, Anupam Saxena, and Roger A. Sauer. Computational Synthesis of Large Deformation Compliant Mechanisms Undergoing Self and Mutual Contact. Journal of Mechanical Design , 141(012302), October 2018. [19] Sam Kriegman, Douglas Blackiston, Michael Levin, and Josh Bongard. A scalable pipeline for designing reconfigurable organisms. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117(4):1853–1859, January 2020. [20] Alp C. Karacakol, Yunus Alapan, Sinan O. Demir, and Metin Sitti. Data-driven design of shape-programmable magnetic soft materials. Nature Communications , 16(1):2946, March 2025. [21] Luke Strgar and Sam Kriegman. Accelerated co-design of robots through morphological pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.10862 , 2025. [22] Luke Strgar, David Matthews, Tyler Hummer, and Sam Kriegman. Evolution and learning in differentiable robots. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , Delft, Netherlands, July 2024. [23] Anurag Bhattacharyya, Jinyoung Kim, Lee R. Alacoque, and Kai A. James. Design Synthesis of a 4D-Printed Self-Tying Knot With Programmable Morphology. Journal of Mechanical Design , 146(063303), December 2023. [24] Charles Schaff, Audrey Sedal, and Matthew R. Walter. Soft robots learn to crawl: Jointly optimizing design and control with sim-to-real transfer. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , June 2022. [25] Tsun-Hsuan Johnson Wang, Juntian Zheng, Pingchuan Ma, Yilun Du, Byungchul Kim, Andrew Spielberg, Josh Tenenbaum, Chuang Gan, and Daniela Rus. DiffuseBot: Breeding Soft Robots With Physics-Augmented Generative Diffusion Models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:44398–44423, December 2023. [26] Liwei Wang, Alexander L. Evenchik, Jared M. Yang, Ryan L. Truby, and Wei Chen. Autonomous codesign and fabrication of multistimuli-responsive material systems. Science Advances , 11(37):eadx4409, September 2025. [27] Giovanni Bordiga, Eder Medina, Sina Jafarzadeh, Cyrill Bösch, Ryan P. Adams, Vincent Tournat, and Ka-tia Bertoldi. Automated discovery of reprogrammable nonlinear dynamic metamaterials. Nature Materials ,23(11):1486–1494, November 2024. 17 COSMIC A P REPRINT 

[28] Atoosa Parsa, Corey S. O’Hern, Rebecca Kramer-Bottiglio, and Josh Bongard. Gradient-based design of computational granular crystals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04825 , 2024. [29] Chenfanfu Jiang, Craig Schroeder, Joseph Teran, Alexey Stomakhin, and Andrew Selle. The material point method for simulating continuum materials. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2016 Courses , SIGGRAPH ’16, New York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing Machinery. [30] Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Pingchuan Ma, Andrew Everett Spielberg, Zhou Xian, Hao Zhang, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Daniela Rus, and Chuang Gan. Softzoo: A soft robot co-design benchmark for locomotion in diverse environments. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09555 , 2023. [31] Joshua Davy, Peter Lloyd, James H. Chandler, and Pietro Valdastri. A framework for simulation of magnetic soft robots using the material point method. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 8(6):3470–3477, 2023. [32] Andrew Spielberg, Tao Du, Yuanming Hu, Daniela Rus, and Wojciech Matusik. Advanced soft robot modeling in ChainQueen. Robotica , 41(1):74–104, January 2023. [33] Rhys Newbury, Jack Collins, Kerry He, Jiahe Pan, Ingmar Posner, David Howard, and Akansel Cosgun. A review of differentiable simulators. IEEE Access , 12:97581–97604, 2024. [34] Tianju Xue, Shuheng Liao, Zhengtao Gan, Chanwook Park, Xiaoyu Xie, Wing Kam Liu, and Jian Cao. JAX-FEM: A differentiable GPU-accelerated 3D finite element solver for automatic inverse design and mechanistic data science. Computer Physics Communications , 291:108802, October 2023. [35] Yuanming Hu, Luke Anderson, Tzu-Mao Li, Qi Sun, Nathan Carr, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, and Frédo Durand. Difftaichi: Differentiable programming for physical simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00935 , 2020. [36] Tao Du, Kui Wu, Pingchuan Ma, Sebastien Wah, Andrew Spielberg, Daniela Rus, and Wojciech Matusik. Diffpd: Differentiable projective dynamics. ACM Trans. Graph. , 41(2), November 2021. [37] Yingqi Jia, Chao Wang, and Xiaojia Shelly Zhang. FEniTop: a simple FEniCSx implementation for 2D and 3D topology optimization supporting parallel computing. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization , 67(8):140, August 2024. [38] Yuki Sato, Changyoung Yuhn, Hiroki Kobayashi, Atsushi Kawamoto, and Tsuyoshi Nomura. Computational co-design of structure and feedback controller for locomoting soft robots. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization , 68(9):185, September 2025. [39] Changyoung Yuhn, Yuki Sato, Hiroki Kobayashi, Atsushi Kawamoto, and Tsuyoshi Nomura. 4d topology optimization: Integrated optimization of the structure and self-actuation of soft bodies for dynamic motions. 

Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 414:116187, 2023. [40] Pingchuan Ma, Tao Du, John Z. Zhang, Kui Wu, Andrew Spielberg, Robert K. Katzschmann, and Wojciech Matusik. DiffAqua: a differentiable computational design pipeline for soft underwater swimmers with shape interpolation. ACM Trans. Graph. , 40(4):132:1–132:14, July 2021. [41] Andrew Spielberg, Allan Zhao, Yuanming Hu, Tao Du, Wojciech Matusik, and Daniela Rus. Learning-In-The-Loop Optimization: End-To-End Control And Co-Design Of Soft Robots Through Learned Deep Latent Representations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. [42] Liwei Wang. Co-design of magnetic soft robots with large deformation and contacts via material point method and topology optimization. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 445:118205, October 2025. [43] Thomas S. Lumpe and Kristina Shea. Computational Design of Multi-State Lattice Structures With Finite Mechanisms for Shape Morphing. Journal of Mechanical Design , 145(071701), March 2023. [44] Traiko Dinev, Carlos Mastalli, Vladimir Ivan, Steve Tonneau, and Sethu Vijayakumar. A versatile co-design approach for dynamic legged robots. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 5562–5569. IEEE, 2022. [45] Yue Gao, Bo Su, Lei Jiang, and Feng Gao. Multi-legged robots: progress and challenges. National Science Review , 10(5):nwac214, May 2023. [46] Ken Caluwaerts, Jérémie Despraz, Atıl I¸ sçen, Andrew P Sabelhaus, Jonathan Bruce, Benjamin Schrauwen, and Vytas SunSpiral. Design and control of compliant tensegrity robots through simulation and hardware validation. 

Journal of the royal society interface , 11(98), 2014. [47] Dylan S. Shah, Joran W. Booth, Robert L. Baines, Kun Wang, Massimo Vespignani, Kostas Bekris, and Rebecca Kramer-Bottiglio. Tensegrity Robotics. Soft Robotics , 9(4):639–656, August 2022. [48] Ryotaro Kinjo, Yosuke Shimizu, Yuya Morimoto, and Shoji Takeuchi. Biohybrid bipedal robot powered by skeletal muscle tissue. Matter , 7(3):1026–1041, 2024. 18 COSMIC A P REPRINT 

[49] Victoria A Webster-Wood, Maria Guix, Nicole W Xu, Bahareh Behkam, Hirotaka Sato, Deblina Sarkar, Samuel Sanchez, Masahiro Shimizu, and Kevin Kit Parker. Biohybrid robots: recent progress, challenges, and perspectives. 

Bioinspiration & Biomimetics , 18(1):015001, November 2022. [50] Zhi Zhao and Xiaojia Shelly Zhang. Topology optimization of hard-magnetic soft materials. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 158:104628, January 2022. [51] Auke Jan Ijspeert. Central pattern generators for locomotion control in animals and robots: a review. Neural networks , 21(4):642–653, 2008. [52] M. P. Bendsøe. Optimal shape design as a material distribution problem. Structural optimization , 1(4):193–202, December 1989. [53] Michel Fortin and Roland Glowinski. Augmented Lagrangian methods: applications to the numerical solution of boundary-value problems , volume 15. Elsevier, 2000. [54] Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432 , 2013. [55] Frank L. Roth, Raymond L. Driscoll, and William L. Holt. Frictional Properties of Rubber. Rubber Chemistry and Technology , 16(1):155–177, March 1943. [56] Lingyu Sun, Yunru Yu, Zhuoyue Chen, Feika Bian, Fangfu Ye, Lingyun Sun, and Yuanjin Zhao. Biohybrid robotics with living cell actuation. Chemical Society Reviews , 49(12):4043–4069, 2020. [57] Xiangpeng Liang, Jianshi Tang, Yanan Zhong, Bin Gao, He Qian, and Huaqiang Wu. Physical reservoir computing with emerging electronics. Nature Electronics , 7(3):193–206, 2024. [58] Ryan H Lee, Erwin AB Mulder, and Jonathan B Hopkins. Mechanical neural networks: Architected materials that learn behaviors. Science Robotics , 7(71):eabq7278, 2022. 19