Title: Representation-Guided Generation and Integration of Executable Programs for Robot Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.31337v1

Published Time: Mon, 28 Sep 2026 01:13:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Representation-Guided Generation and Integration of Executable Programs for Robot Manipulation 

Ruixiao Yang 1, Mingxin Yu 1, and Chuchu Fan 1

Abstract —Building a robotic manipulation system requires connecting perception, planning, and control through carefully designed representations and interfaces. VLM code generation offers a way to automate this construction, but independently generated components may operate on incompatible geomet-ric and task-level information. We present Representation-guided Integration of VLM-generated Executable Task programs (RIVET), a framework for generating complete manipulation systems around a shared object-centric representation. The representation combines per-object 6D poses, which preserve the metric information required for action grounding, with a relation graph that exposes the task-level structure required for planning. Guided by this representation, a VLM generates cooperating per-ception, rendering, relation-inference, and planning programs, each combining task-specific computation with available pack-ages where useful. The resulting programs are authored once for a manipulation domain and reused on unseen start and goal configurations without code regeneration. We evaluate RIVET on cube stacking, tangram rearrangement, and three-dimensional assembly in simulation and on a physical robot, where we achieve 

83% overall success rate in the real world by reusing offline-generated systems. Our results demonstrate that representation-guided program generation can adapt a common manipulation framework to tasks with different geometric, relational, and sequential requirements. 

Index Terms —Manipulation, Vision-Language Models 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Vision-language models (VLMs) are becoming increasingly capable and useful for robotic manipulation. Their ability to reason about task requirements and visual observations makes them a strong fit to bridge high-level task specifications and robot behavior [2], [3], [8]. However, using VLMs directly as planners makes it hard to know when and why VLMs succeed or fail. Errors in scene understanding and action reasoning can remain implicit in model responses, making failures difficult to diagnose and correct without being explicitly grounded in robotic knowledge [4], [13]. Moreover, using VLM-based planner directly inside the loop can introduce substantial com-putational cost and high inference latency during execution. On the other hand, traditional robotic manipulation pro-vides useful tools within a sense-plan-act structure [18], from decades of effort in computer vision and planning. In this structure, each component solves a well-defined problem, making its behavior easier to verify and diagnose. Once suitable tools are connected through well-specified represen-tations, the resulting system can work reliably across different initial and goal configurations at a lower cost than VLM-based planners. However, selecting these tools and designing 

> 1

Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA, {ruixiao, yumx35, chuchu }@mit.edu 

their connections requires substantial human effort and domain expertise for each new task. The code-generation capability of VLMs suggests a way to automate the construction of manipulation systems. Prior work has used language models to compose perception and control APIs into robot programs [10], [15], as well as to generate plans or planning models over symbolic represen-tations [7], [19]. However, generating individual program components does not by itself determine how a complete system should represent, exchange scene information and be constructed. Perception produces geometric quantities such as masks and object poses, whereas planning often depends on task-level relationships and constraints. And execution requires the planned actions to be grounded back into metric poses. If these components are generated independently, they may disagree on object identities, coordinate conventions, relation semantics, or action effects. The central challenge is therefore to provide a structure that connects visual observations, task-level reasoning, and executions while leaving the task-specific algorithms and their composition as a system to be generated. To address this challenge, we present Representation-guided 

Integration of VLM-generated Executable Task programs (RIVET). Our key design is an object-centric scene representa-tion that combines per-object 6D poses with a task-relevant re-lation graph. The poses preserve the metric information needed to reconstruct scenes and ground actions, while the graph exposes the structural information needed to reason about task constraints and action order. Because both components refer to the same object instances, the representation provides a common interface across perception, relational reasoning, and planning. Guided by this representation, the VLM generates the algorithms implementing each module, combining task-specific computation with available packages where useful. The resulting modules form an executable system that is authored once for a task domain and reused across new start and goal configurations. Concretely, RIVET first defines a scene representation con-taining both object poses and an object relation graph, then generates four cooperating functions: perceive , render ,

relate , and plan . perceive combines vision tools with generated code to recover object poses. render reconstructs represented scenes for inspection and facilitates the generation of relate , which infers task-relevant relationships. plan 

uses these representations to define action preconditions and state transitions, then searches for an action sequence with concrete placement targets. The functions are generated se-quentially by the VLM using the shared scene representation, arXiv:2609.31337v1 [cs.RO] 25 Sep 2026 Offline   

> Image example Meshes Functions
> Task Description Camera
> VLM
> def perceive(rgbd): return poses def relate(meshes): return relations def plan(start, goal): return [(o,T), …] def render(s, cam): return rgb, depth

Online Reuse        

> Start / Goal Perceive
> 6D poses
> +
> 6D pose plan Execution
> A
> B
> Relations
> table
> G
> B
> RY
> W1 G (p ₁, R ₁)
> 2 B (p ₂, R ₂)
> 4 Y
> (p ₃, R ₃)3 R
> (p ₄, R ₄)
> 5 W (p ₅, R ₅)

Fig. 1: Pipeline of RIVET. The system works under the guidance of an object-centric representation combining metric information from per-object 6D poses and structural information from a relation graph, which specifies the dependency of object arrangement. At Offline stage (A), a VLM uses task examples, object meshes, and available tools to write reusable functions: 

perceive and relate transform image observations into scene representations, plan generates position-grounded plans to accomplish the task, and render maps the representation back to an image to facilitate the generation of the other functions. At Online stage (B), the offline-generated perceive , relate , and plan functions process a new start-goal instance to generate a grounded, executable plan. The authored functions are reused across instances without instance-specific rewriting. and each function is provided with the generated code of the earlier functions on which it depends. This helps them maintain consistent meanings for object identities, poses, and relationships. The same VLM and authoring procedure can construct the complete task-specific system across different manipulation domains. Adapting RIVET to a new domain requires only a task description, reference observations, object geometry, camera information, and access to available compu-tational packages; it does not require a human to implement or connect new perception, relation-inference, and planning algorithms. Within each domain, the generated programs are further reused across new initial and goal configurations with-out another round of VLM generation. Their explicit interme-diate representations and planning rules support inspection and programmatic testing. When scene interpretation and planning are fully implemented as local programs, repeated task solving requires no runtime VLM queries. We evaluate RIVET on three tasks: cube stacking, tan-gram rearrangement, and three-dimensional assembly. These tasks span different geometric relationships, and planning constraints, allowing us to examine whether the VLM can construct reusable planning systems that solve a range of task instances. In simulation, systems generated by RIVET achieve more reliable task completion than the baselines. By retaining both object poses and task-relevant relationships, the generated systems connect symbolic action sequences to concrete placement targets, supporting more reliable execution when all baselines fail on two sets of tasks. We further demonstrate the approach on a physical robot with all three tasks, where the same generated programs remain effective across different initial and goal configurations within each task domain, and even under a change of camera view. Our contributions are summarized as follows:  

> •

We introduce RIVET, a representation-guided architec-ture that connects VLM-generated perception and plan-ning through a shared geometric–relational scene repre-sentation.  

> •

We develop an automated authoring procedure that en-ables the same VLM to instantiate complete executable systems across manipulation domains without manual task-specific programming, and to reuse the generated programs across new configurations within each domain.  

> •

We evaluate RIVET on cube stacking, tangram rearrange-ment, and three-dimensional assembly in simulation and on a physical robot, demonstrating cross-domain system generation and within-domain program reuse. II. R ELATED WORK 

VLMs for robotic manipulation and task planning. Vision-language models enable robots to interpret task instructions in the context of visual observations. ViLa [8] uses this capability to generate task plans from observations and language or image goals, incorporating visual feedback after actions. Struc-tured planning methods further connect visual reasoning with explicit task constraints: VeriGraph checks model-generated plans through scene-graph transformations [4], while PLa-nAR combines VLM grounding with symbolic planning and execution verification [6]. In these approaches, model infer-ence remains part of interpreting and solving tasks during deployment. Our work investigates moving this reasoning into an offline authoring stage, producing programs that process subsequent observations and compute plans without runtime VLM inference. 

Program synthesis for robotic manipulation. Generating executable code allows language models to express robot behavior through explicit control flow, numerical computation, and calls to robot APIs. Code as Policies and Instruct2Act demonstrate this approach by composing supplied perception and action tools into robot programs [10], [15]. The gener-ated code can also encode geometric objectives: VoxPoser constructs spatial value maps for motion planning [12], and ReKep represents manipulation constraints as Python functions over three-dimensional keypoints [11]. These representations expose task logic for inspection and allow conventional al-gorithms to perform geometric computation. Reuse is already possible within this paradigm; VoxPoser caches generated code and reevaluates it under visual feedback [12]. This motivates examining which perception and planning capabilities can be authored as programs that remain applicable across new task configurations. 

Offline construction of reusable perception and planning systems. The closest work separates the acquisition of task knowledge from its repeated use. LLM-GenPlan [19] syn-thesizes reusable planning programs from supplied PDDL domains and example problems, while PDDLLM derives planning domains from a demonstration and simulation roll-outs, confining language-model token expenditure to domain construction [9]. Recent robot-programming systems also use execution feedback during authoring: RHO [5] optimizes policy repositories, and ASPIRE [16] refines programs and ac-cumulates reusable repair knowledge; both include evaluations of fixed programs across held-out configurations. For visually specified tasks, the deployment requirements of perception re-main consequential. VLMFP [7] reuses generated planning do-mains but invokes a VLM to translate new visual instances into planning problems. ProgGen [20] provides a closer precedent for authoring visual processing itself, synthesizing perception, dynamics, and rendering programs for video prediction. Our focus is the coordinated construction of visual processing and goal-directed planning for physical manipulation. Given reference task images, a task description, and object geometry, RIVET authors a renderer, perceiver, and solver, then freezes these programs across new initial and goal configurations within the same domain. This formulation extends offline authoring across visual grounding and planning, making their task logic available for inspection and programmatic checking while amortizing authoring cost over repeated deployment. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

We consider image-conditioned manipulation, where each task instance comprises a start observation Is, a goal observa-tion Ig , a natural-language task specification τ , a collection of object meshes M, and camera calibration C, including intrinsic and extrinsic parameters. The objective is to produce an executable manipulation plan π = {at}Tt=1 that transforms the observed start configuration into the goal configuration while satisfying the requirements specified by τ . Within a task domain, τ , M, and C remain fixed, whereas Is and Ig vary across instances. The key design of RIVET is an object-centric scene rep-resentation that combines per-object 6D poses with a task-relevant relation graph. The poses retain the metric information required to reconstruct the scene and ground actions in the workspace, while the relation graph exposes the structural information required to reason about constraints and action order. Because both components refer to the same object instances, the representation connects geometric perception, relational reasoning, and executable planning within a com-mon interface. We introduce Representation-guided Integration of VLM-generated Executable Task programs (RIVET), a framework that uses this representation to organize the generation of a complete manipulation system. Rather than asking the VLM to determine the system decomposition and interfaces from scratch, RIVET specifies how each module reads or modi-fies the shared representation. The VLM then generates the algorithms implementing these modules, including both task-specific computation and calls to available packages where useful. In particular, it generates programs that recover met-ric object states from observations, reconstruct those states visually, infer task-relevant relations, and plan actions over the resulting representation. Since the responsibilities and interfaces of the modules are fixed by the representation, the generated programs can be composed into a single executable pipeline and reused across new start and goal configurations. In the following sections, we first introduce the overview of RIVET framework then describe the generated perception and planning modules, followed by robot grounding and execution. 

A. Method Overview 

The task-solving system constructed by RIVET consists of a perception module and a planning module. Given the start and goal observations, the perception module recovers their geometric and task-relevant states, while the planning module compares these states and produces a sequence of object-level actions. Because the two modules are generated separately and operate on different forms of information, they must agree on what constitutes a scene state. We therefore manually specify a shared scene representation that serves as the interface between perception and planning. We represent a scene as 

s = ( O, R) , O = {(i, k i, T i)}ni=1 , Ti ∈ SE (3) , (1) where i identifies an object instance, ki selects its canonical mesh from M, and Ti maps the mesh into the workspace frame. The relation graph R contains task-relevant relations of the objects, like support dependencies between the objects. The metric object O records retain the geometric information needed to specify concrete placement targets, while the rela-tions R expose the discrete conditions needed to determine valid action orderings. We manually fix this representation and its interface conventions so that object identities, co-ordinate frames, and relation semantics remain consistent across modules. Within this interface, the generated programs determine how the required states are constructed and used for a particular task domain. Fig. 1 illustrates how these modules are generated and used. During the offline stage in Fig. 1(A), the VLM receives reference start and goal observations, the task specification 

τ , object meshes M, camera information C, and interfaces to the available robotic tools. Using the reference observations to assess the task and the applicability of these tools, it generates the code for perception and planning. On the perception side, the generated code selects and composes tools with the preprocessing, postprocessing, and coordinate transformations needed to recover O and R. A generated renderer maps represented object states back to visual observations, providing a common visual interface for interpreting and inspecting the recovered state. On the planning side, the generated code defines actions, preconditions, and state transitions over the same scene representation. The shared interface therefore constrains independently generated algorithms to agree on the information passed between them. During the online stage in Fig. 1(B), the generated programs are fixed and applied to a new start-goal pair. The perceiver first maps each observation into the shared representation, 

sx = fperc (Ix, M, C ), x ∈ { s, g }. (2) The planner then takes the perceived start and goal states and produces a transformation-grounded object-level plan, 

π = fplan (ss, s g , τ ) = {(it, T ∗ 

> t

)}Tt=1 , (3) where each action specifies an object instance it and its target pose T ∗ 

> t

. Finally, a fixed control interface grounds these object-level actions into robot motions and executes them. New task instances change only the start and goal observations; they do not invoke another round of VLM-based program authoring. 

B. Perception: Constructing Planner-Ready Scene States 

To transform an image observation into the scene repre-sentation s = ( O, R), RIVET authors three functions with fixed input and output interfaces: perceive , relate , and 

render . Each function is generated with the task specifica-tion, reference observations, scene-representation conventions, and documentation for the tools relevant to its role. Dividing perception into these functions makes explicit which informa-tion each function must produce and allows their outputs to be checked before the programs are reused on new instances. The perceive function recovers the metric object records 

O from an RGB-D observation. Its prompt provides the reference start and goal observations, object meshes M,camera calibration C, the required object-record format, and interfaces to available perception tools. The VLM is asked to determine which tools are applicable to the observed objects and to write the complete procedure for using them, including input preparation, tool invocation, output processing, and coordinate conversion. For example, the generated procedure may obtain object masks using a custom segmentation tool from OpenCV [1] and use these masks, together with the corresponding meshes and depth observation, as inputs to a pose estimator such as FoundationPose [21]. Regardless of the selected tools, perceive must return 

O = {(i, k i, T i)}ni=1 (4) under the instance-identity and coordinate conventions defined by the shared representation. The render function provides a bridge between the metric object records produced by perceive and the spatial reason-ing implemented by relate . It maps an object record O back into an image observation. Its authoring prompt specifies the object-record structure, mesh collection M, camera model C,coordinate conventions, and interface to the available rendering package. The VLM then generates code that places each canonical mesh according to its pose Ti and renders the reconstructed scene from the specified camera: 

ˆI = render (O, M, C ). (5) The reconstructed image allows the VLM to compare the represented scene with the reference observation, supporting inspection of the output of perceive and self-verification during authoring. In addition, the generated source code is in-cluded in the prompt used to author relate . The source code makes the coordinate transformations, mesh conventions, and camera projection explicit, while the rendered image presents the same geometric state in a visual form. Together, they help the VLM generate relation logic that is consistent with the numerical object records produced by perceive . Thus, 

render does not add information to the scene representation; instead, it connects its metric and relational abstractions. The relate function constructs the task-relevant relation graph R from the metric object records O. Its authoring prompt provides the task specification τ , the relation-graph interface, the mesh collection M, the output contract of 

perceive , and the generated source code of render .The renderer code makes explicit how object poses, canon-ical meshes, coordinate frames, and camera parameters are combined to reconstruct a scene. This gives the VLM a concrete interpretation of the metric records when generating the geometric and logical computations used by relate .Based on this context, the VLM determines which relation predicates are required for the task and generates code for computing them from the perceived object states and geom-etry. For example, a stacking task may require support and accessibility relations, whereas an arrangement task may re-quire relative-position or adjacency relations. When executed, the generated function returns 

R = ( V, E) = relate (O, M), (6) where each node in V corresponds to an object instance in O and each typed edge in E represents a task-relevant relationship between instances. Because the graph uses the same instance identifiers and geometric conventions as O, it provides the planner with task-level structure while preserving its connection to the metric poses used for action grounding. For a new observation Ix, the functions are composed as 

Ox = perceive (Ix, M, C ), Rx = relate (Ox, M, τ ),

(7) and return the planner-ready state 

sx = ( Ox, Rx). (8) The fixed function signatures ensure that object identities and coordinate conventions are preserved from tool outputs to metric records and from metric records to relational facts. Each function is checked against its required interface before being frozen and reused across new start and goal observations. 

C. Planning with executable transitions 

The planning module converts the perceived start and goal states ss and sg into a sequence of grounded object actions. RIVET authors a single plan function for each task do-main. Its prompt provides the task specification τ , the scene-representation, reference start and goal states, and the source code and output contracts of the previously generated percep-tion functions. In particular, the implementation of relate 

specifies the meanings of the nodes and edges in R, while the output of perceive specifies how object identities and poses are stored in O. The VLM is asked to generate a planning algorithm that uses both forms of information under these conventions, rather than to produce a plan only for the reference instance. The generated plan function defines the task-level actions, their preconditions, their effects on the scene state, and the condition under which the goal has been reached. Let A(s, s g )

denote the candidate actions generated from the current and goal states, V (s, a ) = 1 means the precondition for applying action a is satisfied, and F (s, a ) its state transition. The generated planner searches for a sequence satisfying 

st+1 = F (st, a t), at ∈ A (st, s g ), V (st, a t) = 1 , (9) and terminates when the generated goal condition Gτ (sT , s g )

is satisfied. The two components of the scene representation serve different roles in this process. The relation graph R provides the structural constraints used to determine which objects can be moved and in what order. The metric records O provide the object identities and target poses needed to ground the selected actions. For example, a support edge may require an obstructing object to be moved before its support, while the corresponding pose in the goal state specifies where that object should ultimately be placed. The generated planner therefore reasons over relations to determine a valid action sequence. During online execution, the authored function is applied to the perceived start and goal states: 

π = plan (ss, s g ) = (i1, T ∗ 

> 1

), . . . , (iT , T ∗ 

> T

), (10) where it identifies the object moved at step t and T ∗ 

> t

∈ SE (3) 

is its target pose. Because τ is fixed within a task domain, its action rules and goal conditions are incorporated when plan 

is authored and need not be interpreted again for each instance. If no sequence satisfies the generated constraints, the function returns an explicit planning failure. The output of plan specifies object-level transfers rather than robot trajectories. Grasp selection and motion generation are handled by the control interface described next. This separation allows the planner to determine task-level ordering and placement targets while leaving robot-specific feasibility and execution to the downstream controller. 

D. Plan Grounding and Robot Execution 

The generated plan specifies a sequence of object-level ac-tions π = {(it, T ∗ 

> t

)}Tt=1 , where it identifies the object to move and T ∗ 

> t

specifies its target pose in the calibrated workspace frame. A fixed execution interface uses the observed and target poses under the robot base frame using the camera-to-robot calibration. Unlike the perception and planning programs, this interface is not generated by the VLM and remains unchanged across task domains. For each action, the executor selects a grasp compatible with the object’s observed and target poses, checks kinematic and geometric feasibility, and generates the corresponding approach, grasp, transfer, release, and retreat motions. These robot-side procedures determine how a planned transfer is realized without changing the object identity, target pose, or action order specified by the planner. The actions are executed sequentially without intermediate visual replanning. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

We evaluate whether RIVET can automatically construct effective and reusable manipulation systems across tasks with different geometric and structural requirements. Our experi-ments address two primary questions: (1) Can RIVET generate systems that solve tasks with different perception and planning requirements, and how do these systems compare with online VLM planners and alternative program-generation methods? (2) Once authored for a task domain, can a fixed generated system be reused across new initial–goal configurations with-out code regeneration? We study these questions through sim-ulation comparisons, real-world deployment, and evaluation under camera-view changes. We further analyze where failures arise across different stages, and report the computation cost associated with program generation. 

A. Experimental Setup 

Platform. We use a Franka Research 3 arm with a Robotiq 2F-85 gripper to manipulate objects. A ZED M camera is mounted on the wrist, and a ZED 2i RGB-D camera is positioned in front of the arm to observe the workspace. All Fig. 2: Experimental task configurations used in simulation and the real world. Rows show cube stacking, tangram arrangement, and 3D block assembly. Columns show four target configurations evaluated for each task. devices are connected to a workstation with an AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 5955WX 16-core and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 to accommodate grasp generation and potential neural-based vision tools in the perceiver. The VLM we used is Claude Opus 5. 

Tasks. We evaluate the same three task families in simula-tion and the real world. Each instance is specified by RGB-D observations of the current and goal configurations together with a task description. The evaluated configurations are shown in Fig. 2. The tasks impose complementary geometric and relational demands: 1) Cube stacking: The robot rearranges several cubes into target stacks. Because cube orientation is immaterial, the goal primarily constrains each cube’s 3D position. Successful execution requires precise horizontal align-ment, correct placement height, and a valid support order: cubes on top must be placed after its support. This task therefore tests metric 3D perception, placement precision, and sequential planning. 2) Tangram arrangement: The robot rearranges tangram pieces to reproduce a target planar pattern. In contrast to cube stacking, this task primarily constrains each piece’s planar position and orientation. The tightly packed ar-rangements make small translational or rotational errors visible as gaps or overlaps. Tangram thus tests piece correspondence and precise joint reasoning over planar translation and rotation. 3) 3D block assembly: The robot rearranges shaped com-ponents into a target three-dimensional structure. The components can severely occlude one another, making their poses and physical relationships difficult to infer from the observations. The robot must also reason about support, accessibility, and assembly order so that each component can be placed and the resulting structure remains stable. This task tests whether the framework can integrate metric perception with relational reasoning and physically grounded planning. 

Protocol. In simulation, we evaluate each task on 20 goal configurations, each paired with three initial configurations, yielding 60 trials per task. We conduct 10 independent program-generation runs and evaluate each generated system on six start-goal pairs. We report success at three stages: state estimation, symbolic planning, and final execution. By evaluating multiple independently generated systems rather than a single selected program, this protocol measures the reliability of our program-generation framework. We set the runtime limit to 10 minutes for each instance. In the real world, we evaluate four goals per task, with five trials per goal using different initial object configurations, yielding 20 trials per task. For each task, we generate one system using Goal 1, freeze it, and reuse it across all 20 trials without modification. This protocol evaluates the reliability of a fixed generated system under variations in initial configura-tion and physical execution, while performance on Goals 2–4 measures generalization beyond the authoring goal. 

Baselines. To compare our methods, we compare our method against: 

a) Models that plan during execution: We compare with ViLa [8] and VeriGraph [4]. VeriGraph uses a VLM to con-struct scene graphs from an initial image and a goal specified by an image or language instruction. An LLM receives these graphs, an action set, and task constraints to predict an action sequence. The proposed actions are applied as graph edits and checked for constraint violations. The updated graph and any detected violations are returned to the planner to refine subsequent predictions. ViLa directly prompts a VLM with the current scene image and task instruction, optionally including a reference goal image, to predict a sequence of actions. The robot executes the first action using an available primitive skill. The updated observation and action history are then provided to the VLM to generate the next plan. This process repeats until the model indicates task completion. 

b) Models that write reusable programs: We compare with Code as Policies (CaP) [15] and Instruct2Act [10]. CaP translates natural-language instructions into executable Python programs that queries available perception APIs, performs TABLE I: Planning result in simulation. Each column is tested with 60 trials. We report the success rate based on three crucial stages. State AC is the ratio of accurate acquisition of the state information required by the downstream planner (VeriGraph evaluates the relation graph only, while RIVET uses both pose and relation). Plan SR is the success rate of generating a correct plan symbolically. Final SR is the success rate of controlling the robot to manipulate from the start scenario to the goal scenario in the MuJoCo simulator. “N/A” denotes that the metric is not applicable to the evaluated method, where ViLa, CaP, Instruct2Act omit the state and generate the plan directly.                                                         

> Cubes Tangram Assembly Method State AC Plan SR Final SR State AC Plan SR Final SR State AC Plan SR Final SR
> ViLa N/A 43.3% N/A N/A 30.0% N/A N/A 8.3% N/A VeriGraph 100% 86.7% 63.3% 80.0% 33.3% 0.0% 10.0% 10.0% 0.0% CaP N/A 86.7% N/A N/A 60.0% N/A N/A 83.3% N/A Instruct2Act N/A 60.0% 46.7% N/A 96.7% 0.0% N/A 0.0% 0.0%
> RIVET(Ours) 100% 100% 100% 90.0% 90.0% 90.0% 93.3% 86.7% 86.7%

geometric and spatial reasoning, and invokes predefined robot skills to accomplish the task. Instruct2Act uses an LLM to generate executable programs that compose predefined perception and manipulation APIs. Following the original method, we provide image-level perception tools SAM [14] for object segmentation and CLIP [17] for identification, and the generated program reasons over their outputs to construct pick-and-place actions. We preserve Instruct2Act’s original image-level reasoning interface, while adapting its pick-and-place primitive to our robot environment. 

B. Main comparison in simulation 

Table I reports performance at three stages. RIVET achieves final success rates of 100% on cube stacking and 90% on tangram arrangement. These tasks aims for complementary capabilities: cube stacking for accurate placement and support-aware action ordering, tangram arrangement for precise pla-nar positioning and orientation. Three-dimensional assembly further challenges the system to recover partially occluded geometry and reason about support and assembly order. The intermediate metrics help distinguish successful task reasoning from successful physical completion. An incorrect scene representation can lead a planner to solve the wrong problem, while a symbolically valid plan can still fail if its actions are not grounded in appropriate placement poses. The shared representation in RIVET makes both geometric targets and task-relevant relationships available to the gener-ated planning code. Evaluating the complete pipeline therefore tests whether these components work together to produce executable behavior. 

C. Comparative Analysis and Failure Modes a) Baseline failures.: The baselines expose complemen-tary limitations at the interface between observation and planning. ViLa reasons about scene structure implicitly and frequently misses action dependencies, such as occupied des-tinations, supports that must first be cleared, and the need for temporary placements. VeriGraph makes these dependencies explicit, but errors in its inferred relations produce incorrectly specified planning problems. Moreover, even a correct relation graph does not preserve metric object poses for planning. For example, globally translating all objects leaves their pairwise relations unchanged but requires every object to be moved. Code-generation baselines leave the internal scene represen-tation to the generated program. Both CaP and Instruct2Act tend to encode task relations using simplified heuristics. For execution, Instruct2Act generates pixel-level actions without estimating object poses. Because image coordinates do not uniquely specify depth or a pose in the robot frame, these ac-tions cannot directly provide consistent 3D placement targets. 

b) What RIVET addresses.: These failures expose the need to retain both geometric and structural scene information. RIVET represents each object by a 6D pose for metric action grounding and includes a relation graph for reasoning about dependencies and action order. This allows the planner to use relations to determine which actions are valid while obtaining concrete placement targets from their poses. The representation-guided function interfaces further ensure that perception and planning use consistent object identities, coor-dinate conventions, and relation semantics. The intermediate outputs also allow us to attribute an unsuccessful trial to state estimation, relational reasoning, planning, or execution. 

c) Remaining failures of RIVET.: RIVET does not elim-inate errors within the generated algorithms or the underlying robotic components. Its main perception failures occur under severe occlusion, where the generated perceiver may select an incorrect pose hypothesis for a partially visible tangram or assembly component. Some generated planners also ex-ceed the planning budget because their search procedures explore the state space inefficiently. Physical execution can additionally fail because of grasp or motion feasibility. Thus, RIVET addresses the consistency and integration of perception and planning, but its performance remains bounded by the quality of the selected perception methods, generated search algorithms, and robot controller. 

D. Applicability in Real World 

We report the performance of our framework over 60 real-world trials in Table II. RIVET succeeds in 18/20 trials for both cube stacking and tangram arrangement and in 14/20 trials for 3D assembly, yielding an overall success rate of 50/60 (83.3%). The lower assembly success rate reflects the added TABLE II: Real-world execution results. Each entry reports the number of success out of five attempts. For each task domain, the VLM-authored programs are generated using Goal 1, then frozen and reused across all four goals. 

Task Goal 1 Goal 2 Goal 3 Goal 4 Total Cube 5/5 4/5 4/5 5/5 18/20 Tangram 5/5 5/5 5/5 3/5 18/20 Assembly 3/5 4/5 4/5 3/5 14/20 

TABLE III: Robustness under camera pose change. 

Tasks Original Viewpoint 1 Viewpoint 2 Cube Stacking 100% 93.3% 100% Tangram 90% 100% 86.7% 3D block assembly 86.7% 80% 76.7% 

difficulty of jointly satisfying 3D pose, support, and motion-feasibility constraints during physical execution. Importantly, the task-domain programs are generated using Goal 1, then frozen and reused across all four goals without code re-generation. Their performance on Goals 2–4 demonstrates generalization beyond the authoring configuration. 

E. Robustness to Camera Viewpoint 

We further evaluate sensitivity to camera viewpoint in Ta-ble III. We directly test our generated system with two different camera views. Since the authorized system takes the camera as a parameter, adapting a new camera view is directly applicable without any modification in the code. The results suggest that the generated systems can operate under the tested viewpoint changes, with performance depend-ing on the visibility of task-relevant objects and relationships. Views that introduce substantial occlusion make pose recovery more difficult and can consequently affect relation inference and planning. This behavior is consistent with the role of the object-centric representation: the planner operates on re-covered poses and relationships, while the perceiver handles changes in image appearance. Viewpoint changes can therefore be accommodated when the scene representation remains accurate. The remaining sensitivity to occlusion identifies perception as an important limitation of this transfer. V. C ONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION 

We presented RIVET, an abstraction-guided VLM tool or-chestration framework that generates task-specific perception, rendering, and planning programs around shared geometric and relational representations. The generated programs com-bine specialized robotic tools with task-specific processing and can be reused across new initial and goal configura-tions without repeated VLM-based authoring. We evaluate this framework on cube stacking, tangram rearrangement, and three-dimensional assembly in simulation and on a physical robot. Future work will incorporate execution feedback and failure-recovery replanning while extending the framework to more complex, contact-rich manipulation tasks. REFERENCES [1] G. Bradski, A. Kaehler, et al. Opencv. Dr. Dobb’s journal of software tools , 3(2):1–81, 2000. [2] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, X. Chen, K. Choroman-ski, T. Ding, D. Driess, A. Dubey, C. Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 , 2023. [3] D. Driess, F. Xia, M. S. Sajjadi, C. Lynch, A. Chowdhery, B. Ichter, A. Wahid, J. Tompson, Q. Vuong, T. Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378 , 2023. [4] D. Ekpo, M. Levy, S. Suri, C. Huynh, A. Swaminathan, and A. Shrivas-tava. Verigraph: Scene graphs for execution verifiable robot planning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10446 , 2024. [5] K. Elmaaroufi, J. Svegliato, S. Kalade, G. Schelle, S. A. Seshia, and M. Zaharia. Rho: Your coding agent is secretly a roboticist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.16458 , 2026. [6] P. Guo, Z. Mai, Z. Xu, K. Zhang, Q. K. Luu, H. Zhang, Z. Miao, A. Ajoudani, Z. Kingston, Q. Qiu, and Y. She. Planar: Planning-language-grounded agentic reasoning for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.01662 , 2026. [7] Y. Hao, Y. Chen, C. Fan, and Y. Zhang. Simulation to rules: A dual-vlm framework for formal visual planning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2026, pages 50993–51032, 2026. [8] Y. Hu, F. Lin, T. Zhang, L. Yi, and Y. Gao. Look before you leap: Unveiling the power of gpt-4v in robotic vision-language planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17842 , 2023. [9] J. Huang, Y. Xiao, Z. Zhang, M. Coates, J. Hao, and Y. Zhang. One demo is all it takes: Planning domain derivation with llms from a single demonstration. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , volume 2026, pages 2489–2530, 2026. [10] S. Huang, Z. Jiang, H. Dong, Y. Qiao, P. Gao, and H. Li. Instruct2act: Mapping multi-modality instructions to robotic actions with large lan-guage model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11176 , 2023. [11] W. Huang, C. Wang, Y. Li, R. Zhang, and L. Fei-Fei. Rekep: Spatio-temporal reasoning of relational keypoint constraints for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.01652 , 2024. [12] W. Huang, C. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Wu, and L. Fei-Fei. Voxposer: Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05973 , 2023. [13] W. Huang, F. Xia, T. Xiao, H. Chan, J. Liang, P. Florence, A. Zeng, J. Tompson, I. Mordatch, Y. Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608 , 2022. [14] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo, P. Doll´ ar, and R. Girshick. Segment anything. In 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 3992–4003, 2023. [15] J. Liang, W. Huang, F. Xia, P. Xu, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, P. Florence, and A. Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE International conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , pages 9493–9500. IEEE, 2023. [16] R. Lu, Y. Wu, E. Kou, L. Fu, W. Xiao, A. Mandlekar, Y. Xu, G. Shi, K. Goldberg, A. Chen, et al. Aspire: Agentic/skills discovery for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.00272 , 2026. [17] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021. [18] B. Siciliano, O. Khatib, and T. Kr¨ oger. Springer handbook of robotics ,volume 200. Springer, 2008. [19] T. Silver, S. Dan, K. Srinivas, J. B. Tenenbaum, L. Kaelbling, and M. Katz. Generalized planning in pddl domains with pretrained large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 38, pages 20256–20264, 2024. [20] H. Tang, K. Ellis, S. Lohit, M. J. Jones, and M. Chatterjee. Program-matic video prediction using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14948 , 2025. [21] B. Wen, W. Yang, J. Kautz, and S. Birchfield. Foundationpose: Unified 6d pose estimation and tracking of novel objects. In 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 17868–17879. IEEE, 2024.